- CHAPTER 1 -
Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra

TEXT  1

Da*Taraí\ ovac

DaMaR+ae}ae ku-å+ae}ae SaMaveTaa YauYauTSav" )

MaaMak-a" Paa<@vaêEv ik-Maku-vRTa SaÅYa )) 1 ))

dhåtaräñöra uväca
dharma-kñetre kuru-kñetre
samavetä yuyutsavaù
mämakäù päëòaväç caiva
kim akurvata saïjaya

SYNONYMS

dhåtaräñöraù uväca—King Dhåtaräñöra said; dharma-kñetre—in the place of
pilgrimage; kuru-kñetre—in the place named Kurukñetra;
samavetäù—assembled; yuyutsavaù—desiring to fight; mämakäù—my party
(sons); päëòaväù—the sons of Päëòu; ca—and; eva—certainly; kim—what;
akurvata—did they do; saïjaya—O Saïjaya.

TRANSLATION

Dhåtaräñöra said: O Saïjaya, after my sons and the sons of Päëòu assembled

in the place of pilgrimage at Kurukñetra, desiring to fight, what did they do?

PURPORT

Bhagavad-gétä  is  the  widely  read  theistic  science  summarized  in  the
Gétä-mähätmya (Glorification of the Gétä). There it says that one should read
Bhagavad-gétä very scrutinizingly with the help of a person who is a devotee of
Çré  Kåñëa  and  try  to  understand 
it  without  personally  motivated
interpretations.  The  example  of  clear  understanding  is  there  in  the
Bhagavad-gétä  itself,  in  the  way  the  teaching  is  understood  by  Arjuna,  who
heard  the  Gétä  directly  from  the  Lord.  If  someone  is  fortunate  enough  to
understand  Bhagavad-gétä  in  that  line  of  disciplic  succession,  without
motivated interpretation, then he surpasses all studies of Vedic wisdom, and all
scriptures of the world. One will find in the Bhagavad-gétä all that is contained
in  other  scriptures,  but  the  reader  will  also  find  things  which  are  not  to  be
found  elsewhere.  That  is  the  specific  standard  of  the  Gétä.  It  is  the  perfect
theistic  science  because  it  is  directly  spoken  by  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa.

The  topics  discussed  by  Dhåtaräñöra  and  Saïjaya,  as  described  in  the
Mahäbhärata,  form  the  basic  principle  for  this  great  philosophy.  It  is
understood  that  this  philosophy  evolved  on  the  Battlefield  of  Kurukñetra,
which is a sacred place of pilgrimage from the immemorial time of the Vedic
age. It was spoken by the Lord when He was present personally on this planet
for the guidance of mankind.

The  word  dharma-kñetra  (a  place  where  religious  rituals  are  performed)  is
significant because, on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead was present on the side of Arjuna. Dhåtaräñöra, the father of the
Kurus, was highly doubtful about the possibility of his sons’ ultimate victory. In
his doubt, he inquired from his secretary Saïjaya, “What did they do?” He was
confident that both his sons and the sons of his younger brother Päëòu were
assembled in that Field of Kurukñetra for a determined engagement of the war.
Still,  his  inquiry  is  significant.  He  did  not  want  a  compromise  between  the
cousins and brothers, and he wanted to be sure of the fate of his sons on the
battlefield. Because the battle was arranged to be fought at Kurukñetra, which
is  mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  Vedas  as  a  place  of  worship—even  for  the
denizens  of  heaven—Dhåtaräñöra  became  very  fearful  about  the  influence  of
the holy place on the outcome of the battle. He knew very well that this would

influence  Arjuna  and  the  sons  of  Päëòu  favorably,  because  by  nature  they
were all virtuous. Saïjaya was a student of Vyäsa, and therefore, by the mercy
of Vyäsa, Saïjaya was able to envision the Battlefield of Kurukñetra even while
he  was  in  the  room  of  Dhåtaräñöra.  And  so,  Dhåtaräñöra  asked  him  about  the
situation on the battlefield.

Both the Päëòavas and the sons of Dhåtaräñöra belong to the same family,
but  Dhåtaräñöra’s  mind  is  disclosed  herein.  He  deliberately  claimed  only  his
sons  as  Kurus,  and  he  separated  the  sons  of  Päëòu  from  the  family  heritage.
One  can  thus  understand  the  specific  position  of  Dhåtaräñöra  in  his
relationship  with  his  nephews,  the  sons  of  Päëòu.  As  in  the  paddy  field  the
unnecessary plants are taken out, so it is expected from the very beginning of
these  topics  that  in  the  religious  field  of  Kurukñetra,  where  the  father  of
religion,  Çré  Kåñëa,  was  present,  the  unwanted  plants  like  Dhåtaräñöra’s  son
Duryodhana  and  others  would  be  wiped  out  and  the  thoroughly  religious
persons, headed by Yudhiñöhira, would be established by the Lord. This is the
significance  of  the  words  dharma-kñetre  and  kuru-kñetre,  apart  from  their
historical and Vedic importance.

TEXT  2

SaÅYa ovac

d*îa Tau Paa<@vaNaqk&- VYaU!& duYaaeRDaNaSTada )

AacaYaRMauPaSa®MYa raJaa vcNaMab]vqTa( )) 2 ))

saïjaya uväca
dåñövä tu päëòavänékaà
vyüòhaà duryodhanas tadä
äcäryam upasaìgamya
räjä vacanam abravét

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; dåñövä—after seeing; tu—but;

päëòava-anékam—the soldiers of the Päëòavas; vyüòham—arranged in a
military phalanx; duryodhanaù—King Duryodhana; tadä—at that time;
äcäryam—the teacher; upasaìgamya—approaching; räjä—the king;
vacanam—words; abravét—spoke.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said: O King, after looking over the army arranged in military
formation by the sons of Päëòu, King Duryodhana went to his teacher and
spoke the following words.

PURPORT

Dhåtaräñöra  was  blind  from  birth.  Unfortunately,  he  was  also  bereft  of
spiritual  vision.  He  knew  very  well  that  his  sons  were  equally  blind  in  the
matter  of  religion,  and  he  was  sure  that  they  could  never  reach  an
understanding with the Päëòavas, who were all pious since birth. Still he was
doubtful  about  the  influence  of  the  place  of  pilgrimage,  and  Saïjaya  could
understand his motive in asking about the situation on the battlefield. Saïjaya
wanted,  therefore,  to  encourage  the  despondent  king  and  thus  assured  him
that  his  sons  were  not  going  to  make  any  sort  of  compromise  under  the
influence of the holy place. Saïjaya therefore informed the king that his son,
Duryodhana, after seeing the military force of the Päëòavas, at once went to
the  commander  in  chief,  Droëäcärya,  to  inform  him  of  the  real  position.
Although  Duryodhana  is  mentioned  as  the  king,  he  still  had  to  go  to  the
commander  on  account  of  the  seriousness  of  the  situation.  He  was  therefore
quite  fit  to  be  a  politician.  But  Duryodhana’s  diplomatic  veneer  could  not
disguise  the  fear  he  felt  when  he  saw  the  military  arrangement  of  the
Päëòavas.

TEXT  3

PaXYaETaa& Paa<@uPau}aa<aaMaacaYaR MahTaq& cMaUMa( )

VYaU!a& d]uPadPau}ae<a Tav iXaZYae<a DaqMaTaa )) 3 ))

paçyaitäà päëòu-puträëäm
äcärya mahatéà camüm
vyüòhäà drupada-putreëa
tava çiñyeëa dhématä

SYNONYMS

paçya—behold; etäm—this; päëòu-puträëäm—of the sons of Päëòu;
äcärya—O teacher; mahatém—great; camüm—military force;
vyüòhäm—arranged; drupada-putreëa—by the son of Drupada; tava—your;
çiñyeëa—disciple; dhé-matä—very intelligent.

TRANSLATION

O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Päëòu, so expertly

arranged by your intelligent disciple the son of Drupada.

PURPORT

Duryodhana,  a  great  diplomat,  wanted  to  point  out  the  defects  of
Droëäcärya,  the  great  brähmaëa  commander  in  chief.  Droëäcärya  had  some
political quarrel with King Drupada, the father of Draupadé, who was Arjuna’s
wife. As a result of this quarrel, Drupada performed a great sacrifice, by which
he  received  the  benediction  of  having  a  son  who  would  be  able  to  kill
Droëäcärya.  Droëäcärya  knew  this  perfectly  well,  and  yet  as  a  liberal
brähmaëa he did not hesitate to impart all his military secrets when the son of
Drupada, Dhåñöadyumna, was entrusted to him for military education. Now, on
the  Battlefield  of  Kurukñetra,  Dhåñöadyumna  took  the  side  of  the  Päëòavas,
and it was he who arranged for their military phalanx, after having learned the
art from Droëäcärya. Duryodhana pointed out this mistake of Droëäcärya’s so
that he might be alert and uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wanted
to  point  out  also  that  he  should  not  be similarly lenient in battle against the

Päëòavas,  who  were  also  Droëäcärya’s  affectionate  students.  Arjuna,
especially,  was  his  most  affectionate  and  brilliant  student.  Duryodhana  also
warned that such leniency in the fight would lead to defeat.

TEXT  4

A}a éUra MaheZvaSaa >aqMaaJauRNaSaMaa YauiDa )

YauYauDaaNaae ivra$=ê d]uPadê MaharQa" )) 4 ))

atra çürä maheñv-äsä
bhémärjuna-samä yudhi
yuyudhäno viräöaç ca
drupadaç ca mahä-rathaù

SYNONYMS

atra—here; çüräù—heroes; mahä-iñu-äsäù—mighty bowmen;
bhéma-arjuna—to Bhéma and Arjuna; samäù—equal; yudhi—in the fight;
yuyudhänaù—Yuyudhäna; viräöaù—Viräöa; ca—also; drupadaù—Drupada;
ca—also; mahä-rathaù—great fighter.

TRANSLATION

Here in this army are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhéma and

Arjuna: great fighters like Yuyudhäna, Viräöa and Drupada.

PURPORT

Even though Dhåñöadyumna was not a very important obstacle in the face
of  Droëäcärya’s  very  great  power  in  the military art, there were many others
who  were  causes  of  fear.  They  are  mentioned  by  Duryodhana  as  great
stumbling  blocks  on  the  path  of  victory  because  each  and  every  one  of  them
was as formidable as Bhéma and Arjuna. He knew the strength of Bhéma and
Arjuna, and thus he compared the others with them.

TEXT  5

Da*íke-Tauêeik-TaaNa" k-aiXaraJaê vqYaRvaNa( )

PauåiJaTku-iNTa>aaeJaê XaEBYaê NarPau®v" )) 5 ))

dhåñöaketuç cekitänaù
käçiräjaç ca véryavän
purujit kuntibhojaç ca
çaibyaç ca nara-puìgavaù

SYNONYMS

dhåñöaketuù—Dhåñöaketu; cekitänaù—Cekitäna; käçiräjaù—Käçiräja; ca—also;
vérya-vän—very powerful; purujit—Purujit; kuntibhojaù—Kuntibhoja;
ca—and; çaibyaù—Çaibya; ca—and; nara-puìgavaù—hero in human society.

TRANSLATION

There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhåñöaketu, Cekitäna,

Käçiräja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Çaibya.

TEXT  6

YauDaaMaNYauê iv§-aNTa otaMaaEJaaê vqYaRvaNa( )

SaaE>ad]ae d]aEPadeYaaê SavR Wv MaharQaa" )) 6 ))

yudhämanyuç ca vikränta
uttamaujäç ca véryavän
saubhadro draupadeyäç ca
sarva eva mahä-rathäù

SYNONYMS

yudhämanyuù—Yudhämanyu; ca—and; vikräntaù—mighty;
uttamaujäù—Uttamaujä; ca—and; vérya-vän—very powerful;
saubhadraù—the son of Subhadrä; draupadeyäù—the sons of Draupadé;
ca—and; sarve—all; eva—certainly; mahä-rathäù—great chariot fighters.

TRANSLATION

There are the mighty Yudhämanyu, the very powerful Uttamaujä, the son of
Subhadrä and the sons of Draupadé. All these warriors are great chariot fighters.

TEXT  7

ASMaak&- Tau iviXaía Yae TaaiàbaeDa iÜJaaetaMa )

NaaYak-a MaMa SaENYaSYa Sa&jaQa| TaaNb]vqiMa Tae )) 7 ))

asmäkaà tu viçiñöä ye
tän nibodha dvijottama
näyakä mama sainyasya
saàjïärthaà tän bravémi te

SYNONYMS

asmäkam—our; tu—but; viçiñöäù—especially powerful; ye—who; tän—them;
nibodha—just take note of, be informed; dvija-uttama—O best of the
brähmaëas; näyakäù—captains; mama—my; sainyasya—of the soldiers;
saàjïä-artham—for information; tän—them; bravémi—I am speaking; te—to
you.

TRANSLATION

But for your information, O best of the brähmaëas, let me tell you about the

captains who are especially qualified to lead my military force.

TEXT  8

>avaN>aqZMaê k-<aRê k*-Paê SaiMaiTa&JaYa" )

AìTQaaMaa ivk-<aRê SaaEMaditaSTaQaEv c )) 8 ))

bhavän bhéñmaç ca karëaç ca
kåpaç ca samitià-jayaù
açvatthämä vikarëaç ca
saumadattis tathaiva ca

SYNONYMS

bhavän—your good self; bhéñmaù—Grandfather Bhéñma; ca—also;
karëaù—Karëa; ca—and; kåpaù—Kåpa; ca—and; samitim-jayaù—always
victorious in battle; açvatthämä—Açvatthämä; vikarëaù—Vikarëa; ca—as well
as; saumadattiù—the son of Somadatta; tathä—as well as; eva—certainly;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

There are personalities like you, Bhéñma, Karëa, Kåpa, Açvatthämä, Vikarëa
and the son of Somadatta called Bhüriçravä, who are always victorious in battle.

PURPORT

Duryodhana mentions the exceptional heroes in the battle, all of whom are
ever victorious. Vikarëa is the brother of Duryodhana, Açvatthämä is the son
of  Droëäcärya,  and  Saumadatti,  or  Bhüriçravä,  is  the  son  of  the  King  of  the
Bählékas. Karëa is the half brother of Arjuna, as he was born of Kunté before
her marriage with King Päëòu. Kåpäcärya’s twin sister married Droëäcärya.

TEXT  9

ANYae c bhv" éUra MadQaeR TYa¢-JaqivTaa" )

NaaNaaXañPa[hr<aa" SaveR YauÖivXaarda" )) 9 ))

anye ca bahavaù çürä
mad-arthe tyakta-jévitäù
nänä-çastra-praharaëäù
sarve yuddha-viçäradäù

SYNONYMS

anye—others; ca—also; bahavaù—in great numbers; çüräù—heroes;
mat-arthe—for my sake; tyakta-jévitäù—prepared to risk life; nänä—many;
çastra—weapons; praharaëäù—equipped with; sarve—all of them;
yuddha-viçäradäù—experienced in military science.

TRANSLATION

There are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives for my
sake. All of them are well equipped with different kinds of weapons, and all are
experienced in military science.

PURPORT

As  far  as  the  others  are  concerned—like  Jayadratha,  Kåtavarmä  and
Çalya—all  are  determined  to  lay  down  their  lives  for  Duryodhana’s  sake.  In
other words, it is already concluded that all of them would die in the Battle of
Kurukñetra for joining the party of the sinful Duryodhana. Duryodhana was, of
course, confident of his victory on account of the above-mentioned combined
strength of his friends.

TEXT  10

APaYaaRá& TadSMaak&- bl&/ >aqZMaai>ari+aTaMa( )

PaYaaRá& iTvdMaeTaeza& bl&/ >aqMaai>ari+aTaMa( )) 10 ))

aparyäptaà tad asmäkaà
balaà bhéñmäbhirakñitam
paryäptaà tv idam eteñäà
balaà bhémäbhirakñitam

SYNONYMS

aparyäptam—immeasurable; tat—that; asmäkam—of ours; balam—strength;
bhéñma—by Grandfather Bhéñma; abhirakñitam—perfectly protected;
paryäptam—limited; tu—but; idam—all this; eteñäm—of the Päëòavas;
balam—strength; bhéma—by Bhéma; abhirakñitam—carefully protected.

TRANSLATION

Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather
Bhéñma, whereas the strength of the Päëòavas, carefully protected by Bhéma, is
limited.

PURPORT

Herein an estimation of comparative strength is made by Duryodhana. He
thinks that the strength of his armed forces is immeasurable, being specifically
protected by the most experienced general, Grandfather Bhéñma. On the other
hand,  the  forces  of  the  Päëòavas  are  limited,  being  protected  by  a  less
experienced  general,  Bhéma,  who  is  like  a  fig  in  the  presence  of  Bhéñma.
Duryodhana was always envious of Bhéma because he knew perfectly well that
if he should die at all, he would only be killed by Bhéma. But at the same time,
he was confident of his victory on account of the presence of Bhéñma, who was
a  far  superior  general.  His  conclusion  that  he  would  come  out  of  the  battle
victorious was well ascertained.

TEXT  11

AYaNaezu c SaveRzu YaQaa>aaGaMaviSQaTaa" )

>aqZMaMaevai>ar+aNTau >avNTa" SavR Wv ih )) 11 ))

ayaneñu ca sarveñu
yathä-bhägam avasthitäù
bhéñmam eväbhirakñantu
bhavantaù sarva eva hi

SYNONYMS

ayaneñu—in the strategic points; ca—also; sarveñu—everywhere;
yathä-bhägam—as differently arranged; avasthitäù—situated; bhéñmam—unto
Grandfather Bhéñma; eva—certainly; abhirakñantu—should give support;
bhavantaù—you; sarve—all respectively; eva hi—certainly.

TRANSLATION

All of you must now give full support to Grandfather Bhéñma, as you stand

at your respective strategic points of entrance into the phalanx of the army.

PURPORT

Duryodhana, after praising the prowess of Bhéñma, further considered that
others  might  think  that  they  had  been  considered  less  important,  so  in  his
usual  diplomatic  way,  he  tried  to  adjust  the  situation  in  the  above  words.  He
emphasized that Bhéñmadeva was undoubtedly the greatest hero, but he was an
old man, so everyone must especially think of his protection from all sides. He
might become engaged in the fight, and the enemy might take advantage of his
full engagement on one side. Therefore, it was important that other heroes not
leave  their  strategic  positions  and  allow  the  enemy  to  break  the  phalanx.
Duryodhana  clearly  felt  that  the  victory  of  the  Kurus  depended  on  the
presence  of  Bhéñmadeva.  He  was  confident  of  the  full  support  of  Bhéñmadeva
and  Droëäcärya  in  the  battle  because  he  well  knew  that  they  did  not  even
speak  a  word  when  Arjuna’s  wife  Draupadé,  in  her  helpless  condition,  had
appealed to them for justice while she was being forced to appear naked in the

presence of all the great generals in the assembly. Although he knew that the
two generals had some sort of affection for the Päëòavas, he hoped that these
generals  would  now  completely  give  it  up,  as  they  had  done  during  the
gambling performances.

TEXT  12

TaSYa SaÅNaYaNhz| ku-åv*Ö" iPaTaaMah" )

iSa&hNaad& ivNaÛaeÀE" Xa«& dDMaaE Pa[TaaPavaNa( )) 12 ))

tasya saïjanayan harñaà
kuru-våddhaù pitämahaù
siàha-nädaà vinadyoccaiù
çaìkhaà dadhmau pratäpavän

SYNONYMS

tasya—his; saïjanayan—increasing; harñam—cheerfulness;
kuru-våddhaù—the grandsire of the Kuru dynasty (Bhéñma); pitämahaù—the
grandfather; siàha-nädam—roaring sound, like that of a lion;
vinadya—vibrating; uccaiù—very loudly; çaìkham—conchshell;
dadhmau—blew; pratäpa-vän—the valiant.

TRANSLATION

Then Bhéñma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the

grandfather of the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly, making a sound like
the roar of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy.

PURPORT

The grandsire of the Kuru dynasty could understand the inner meaning of
the heart of his grandson Duryodhana, and out of his natural compassion for
him he tried to cheer him by blowing his conchshell very loudly, befitting his

position as a lion. Indirectly, by the symbolism of the conchshell, he informed
his  depressed  grandson  Duryodhana  that  he  had  no  chance  of  victory  in  the
battle, because the Supreme Lord Kåñëa was on the other side. But still, it was
his duty to conduct the fight, and no pains would be spared in that connection.

TEXT  13

TaTa" Xa«aê >aeYaRê Pa<avaNak-GaaeMau%a" )

SahSaEva>YahNYaNTa Sa XaBdSTauMaul/ae_>avTa( )) 13 ))

tataù çaìkhäç ca bheryaç ca
paëavänaka-gomukhäù
sahasaiväbhyahanyanta
sa çabdas tumulo ’bhavat

SYNONYMS

tataù—thereafter; çaìkhäù—conchshells; ca—also; bheryaù—large drums;
ca—and; paëava-änaka—small drums and kettledrums; go-mukhäù—horns;
sahasä—all of a sudden; eva—certainly; abhyahanyanta—were simultaneously
sounded; saù—that; çabdaù—combined sound; tumulaù—tumultuous;
abhavat—became.

TRANSLATION

After that, the conchshells, drums, bugles, trumpets and horns were all

suddenly sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.

TEXT  14

TaTa" ìeTaEhRYaEYauR¢e- MahiTa SYaNdNae iSQaTaaE )

MaaDav" Paa<@vêEv idVYaaE Xa«aE Pa[dDMaTau" )) 14 ))

tataù çvetair hayair yukte
mahati syandane sthitau
mädhavaù päëòavaç caiva
divyau çaìkhau pradadhmatuù

SYNONYMS

tataù—thereafter; çvetaiù—with white; hayaiù—horses; yukte—being yoked;
mahati—in a great; syandane—chariot; sthitau—situated; mädhavaù—Kåñëa
(the husband of the goddess of fortune); päëòavaù—Arjuna (the son of
Päëòu); ca—also; eva—certainly; divyau—transcendental;
çaìkhau—conchshells; pradadhmatuù—sounded.

TRANSLATION

On the other side, both Lord Kåñëa and Arjuna, stationed on a great chariot

drawn by white horses, sounded their transcendental conchshells.

PURPORT

In  contrast  with  the  conchshell  blown  by  Bhéñmadeva,  the  conchshells  in
the hands of Kåñëa and Arjuna are described as transcendental. The sounding
of the transcendental conchshells indicated that there was no hope of victory
for  the  other  side  because  Kåñëa  was  on  the  side  of  the  Päëòavas.  Jayas  tu
päëòu-puträëäà  yeñäà  pakñe  janärdanaù.  Victory  is  always  with  persons  like
the sons of Päëòu because Lord Kåñëa is associated with them. And whenever
and wherever the Lord is present, the goddess of fortune is also there because
the  goddess  of  fortune  never  lives  alone  without  her  husband.  Therefore,
victory and fortune were awaiting Arjuna, as indicated by the transcendental
sound  produced  by  the  conchshell  of  Viñëu,  or  Lord  Kåñëa.  Besides  that,  the
chariot on which both the friends were seated had been donated by Agni (the
fire-god)  to  Arjuna,  and  this  indicated  that  this  chariot  was  capable  of
conquering all sides, wherever it was drawn over the three worlds.

TEXT  15

PaaÄJaNYa& ôzqke-Xaae devdta& DaNaÅYa" )

PaaE<@\& dDMaaE MahaXa«& >aqMak-MaaR v*k-aedr" )) 15 ))

päïcajanyaà håñékeço
devadattaà dhanaïjayaù
pauëòraà dadhmau mahä-çaìkhaà
bhéma-karmä våkodaraù

SYNONYMS

päïcajanyam—the conchshell named Päïcajanya; håñéka-éçaù—Håñékeça
(Kåñëa, the Lord who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam—the
conchshell named Devadatta; dhanam-jayaù—Dhanaïjaya (Arjuna, the
winner of wealth); pauëòram—the conch named Pauëòra; dadhmau—blew;
mahä-çaìkham—the terrific conchshell; bhéma-karmä—one who performs
herculean tasks; våka-udaraù—the voracious eater (Bhéma).

TRANSLATION

Lord Kåñëa blew His conchshell, called Päïcajanya; Arjuna blew his, the
Devadatta; and Bhéma, the voracious eater and performer of herculean tasks,
blew his terrific conchshell, called Pauëòra.

PURPORT

Lord Kåñëa is referred to as Håñékeça in this verse because He is the owner
of all senses. The living entities are part and parcel of Him, and therefore the
senses  of  the  living  entities  are  also  part  and  parcel  of  His  senses.  The
impersonalists  cannot  account  for  the  senses  of  the  living  entities,  and
therefore they are always anxious to describe all living entities as senseless, or
impersonal. The Lord, situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs their
senses. But He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity, and in the

case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on the Battlefield
of Kurukñetra the Lord directly controls the transcendental senses of Arjuna,
and  thus  His  particular  name  of  Håñékeça.  The  Lord  has  different  names
according  to  His  different  activities.  For  example,  His  name  is  Madhusüdana
because  He  killed  the  demon  of  the  name  Madhu;  His  name  is  Govinda
because He gives pleasure to the cows and to the senses; His name is Väsudeva
because  He  appeared  as  the  son  of  Vasudeva;  His  name  is  Devaké-nandana
because  He  accepted  Devaké  as  His  mother;  His  name  is  Yaçodä-nandana
because  He  awarded  His  childhood  pastimes  to  Yaçodä  at  Våndävana;  His
name is Pärtha-särathi because He worked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna.
Similarly,  His  name  is  Håñékeça  because  He  gave  direction  to  Arjuna  on  the
Battlefield of Kurukñetra.

Arjuna  is  referred  to  as  Dhanaïjaya  in  this  verse  because  he  helped  his
elder  brother  in  fetching  wealth  when  it  was  required  by  the  king  to  make
expenditures  for  different  sacrifices.  Similarly,  Bhéma  is  known  as  Våkodara
because he could eat as voraciously as he could perform herculean tasks, such
as killing the demon Hiòimba. So the particular types of conchshell blown by
the  different  personalities  on  the  side  of  the  Päëòavas,  beginning  with  the
Lord’s,  were  all  very  encouraging  to  the  fighting  soldiers.  On  the  other  side
there  were  no  such  credits,  nor  the  presence  of  Lord  Kåñëa,  the  supreme
director, nor that of the goddess of fortune. So they were predestined to lose
the  battle—and  that  was  the  message  announced  by  the  sounds  of  the
conchshells.

TEXTS  16–18

ANaNTaivJaYa& raJaa ku-NTaqPau}aae YauiDaiïr" )

Naku-l/" Sahdevê SaugaaezMai<aPauZPak-aE )) 16 ))

k-aXYaê ParMaeZvaSa" iXa%<@q c MaharQa" )

Da*íÛuManae ivra$=ê SaaTYaik-êaParaiJaTa" )) 17 ))

d]uPadae d]aEPadeYaaê SavRXa" Pa*iQavqPaTae )

SaaE>ad]ê Mahabahu" Xa«aNdDMau" Pa*QaKPa*Qak(- )) 18 ))

anantavijayaà räjä
kunté-putro yudhiñöhiraù
nakulaù sahadevaç ca
sughoña-maëipuñpakau

käçyaç ca parameñv-äsaù
çikhaëòé ca mahä-rathaù
dhåñöadyumno viräöaç ca
sätyakiç cäparäjitaù

drupado draupadeyäç ca
sarvaçaù påthivé-pate
saubhadraç ca mahä-bähuù
çaìkhän dadhmuù påthak påthak

SYNONYMS

ananta-vijayam—the conch named Ananta-vijaya; räjä—the king;
kunté-putraù—the son of Kunté; yudhiñöhiraù—Yudhiñöhira; nakulaù—Nakula;
sahadevaù—Sahadeva; ca—and; sughoña-maëipuñpakau—the conches named
Sughoña and Maëipuñpaka; käçyaù—the King of Käçé (Väräëasé); ca—and;
parama-iñu-äsaù—the great archer; çikhaëòé—Çikhaëòé; ca—also;
mahä-rathaù—one who can fight alone against thousands;
dhåñöadyumnaù—Dhåñöadyumna (the son of King Drupada); viräöaù—Viräöa
(the prince who gave shelter to the Päëòavas while they were in disguise);
ca—also; sätyakiù—Sätyaki (the same as Yuyudhäna, the charioteer of Lord
Kåñëa); ca—and; aparäjitaù—who had never been vanquished;
drupadaù—Drupada, the King of Päïcäla; draupadeyäù—the sons of Draupadé;
ca—also; sarvaçaù—all; påthivé-pate—O King; saubhadraù—Abhimanyu, the
son of Subhadrä; ca—also; mahä-bähuù—mighty-armed;
çaìkhän—conchshells; dadhmuù—blew; påthak påthak—each separately.

TRANSLATION

King Yudhiñöhira, the son of Kunté, blew his conchshell, the Ananta-vijaya,

and Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughoña and Maëipuñpaka. That great
archer the King of Käçé, the great fighter Çikhaëòé, Dhåñöadyumna, Viräöa, the
unconquerable Sätyaki, Drupada, the sons of Draupadé, and the others, O King,
such as the mighty-armed son of Subhadrä, all blew their respective conchshells.

PURPORT

Saïjaya informed King Dhåtaräñöra very tactfully that his unwise policy of
deceiving the sons of Päëòu and endeavoring to enthrone his own sons on the
seat of the kingdom was not very laudable. The signs already clearly indicated
that  the  whole  Kuru  dynasty  would  be  killed  in  that  great  battle.  Beginning
with  the  grandsire,  Bhéñma,  down  to  the  grandsons  like  Abhimanyu  and
others—including  kings  from  many  states  of  the  world—all  were  present
there,  and  all  were  doomed.  The  whole  catastrophe  was  due  to  King
Dhåtaräñöra, because he encouraged the policy followed by his sons.

TEXT  19

Sa gaaezae DaaTaRraí\a<aa& ôdYaaiNa VYadarYaTa( )

Na>aê Pa*iQavq& cEv TauMaul/ae_>YaNauNaadYaNa( )) 19 ))

sa ghoño dhärtaräñöräëäà
hådayäni vyadärayat
nabhaç ca påthivéà caiva
tumulo ’bhyanunädayan

SYNONYMS

saù—that; ghoñaù—vibration; dhärtaräñöräëäm—of the sons of Dhåtaräñöra;
hådayäni—hearts; vyadärayat—shattered; nabhaù—the sky; ca—also;

påthivém—the surface of the earth; ca—also; eva—certainly;
tumulaù—uproarious; abhyanunädayan—resounding.

TRANSLATION

The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious. Vibrating

both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts of the sons of
Dhåtaräñöra.

PURPORT

When  Bhéñma  and  the  others  on  the  side  of  Duryodhana  blew  their
respective  conchshells,  there  was  no  heart-breaking  on  the  part  of  the
Päëòavas. Such occurrences are not mentioned, but in this particular verse it
is mentioned that the hearts of the sons of Dhåtaräñöra were shattered by the
sounds vibrated by the Päëòavas’ party. This is due to the Päëòavas and their
confidence  in  Lord  Kåñëa.  One  who  takes  shelter  of  the  Supreme  Lord  has
nothing to fear, even in the midst of the greatest calamity.

TEXT  20

AQa VYaviSQaTaaNd*îa DaaTaRraí\aNk-iPaßJa" )

Pa[v*tae XañSaMPaaTae DaNauåÛMYa Paa<@v" )

ôzqke-Xa& Tada vaKYaiMadMaah MahqPaTae )) 20 ))

atha vyavasthitän dåñövä
dhärtaräñörän kapi-dhvajaù
pravåtte çastra-sampäte
dhanur udyamya päëòavaù
håñékeçaà tadä väkyam
idam äha mahé-pate

SYNONYMS

atha—thereupon; vyavasthitän—situated; dåñövä—looking upon;
dhärtaräñörän—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra; kapi-dhvajaù—he whose flag was
marked with Hanumän; pravåtte—while about to engage; çastra-sampäte—in
releasing his arrows; dhanuù—bow; udyamya—taking up; päëòavaù—the son
of Päëòu (Arjuna); håñékeçam—unto Lord Kåñëa; tadä—at that time;
väkyam—words; idam—these; äha—said; mahé-pate—O King.

TRANSLATION

At that time Arjuna, the son of Päëòu, seated in the chariot bearing the flag

marked with Hanumän, took up his bow and prepared to shoot his arrows. O
King, after looking at the sons of Dhåtaräñöra drawn in military array, Arjuna
then spoke to Lord Kåñëa these words.

PURPORT

The  battle  was  just  about  to  begin.  It  is  understood  from  the  above
statement that the sons of Dhåtaräñöra were more or less disheartened by the
unexpected  arrangement  of  military  force  by  the  Päëòavas,  who  were  guided
by  the  direct  instructions  of  Lord  Kåñëa  on  the  battlefield.  The  emblem  of
Hanumän on the  flag of Arjuna is another sign of victory because Hanumän
cooperated with Lord Räma in the battle between Räma and Rävaëa, and Lord
Räma emerged victorious. Now both Räma and Hanumän were present on the
chariot  of  Arjuna  to  help  him.  Lord  Kåñëa  is  Räma  Himself,  and  wherever
Lord Räma is, His eternal servitor Hanumän and His eternal consort Sétä, the
goddess  of  fortune,  are  present.  Therefore,  Arjuna  had  no  cause  to  fear  any
enemies  whatsoever.  And  above  all,  the  Lord  of  the  senses,  Lord  Kåñëa,  was
personally present to give him direction. Thus, all good counsel was available
to Arjuna in the matter of executing the battle. In such auspicious conditions,
arranged by the Lord for His eternal devotee, lay the signs of assured victory.

TEXTS  21–22

AJauRNa ovac

SaeNaYaaeå>aYaaeMaRDYae rQa& SQaaPaYa Mae_CYauTa )

YaavdeTaaiàrq+ae_h& Yaaed(Dauk-aMaaNaviSQaTaaNa( )) 21 ))

kE-MaRYaa Sah YaaeÖVYaMaiSMaNr<aSaMauÛMae )) 22 ))

arjuna uväca
senayor ubhayor madhye
rathaà sthäpaya me ’cyuta
yävad etän nirékñe ’haà
yoddhu-kämän avasthitän
kair mayä saha yoddhavyam
asmin raëa-samudyame

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; senayoù—of the armies; ubhayoù—both;
madhye—between; ratham—the chariot; sthäpaya—please keep; me—my;
acyuta—O infallible one; yävat—as long as; etän—all these; nirékñe—may look
upon; aham—I; yoddhu-kämän—desiring to fight; avasthitän—arrayed on the
battlefield; kaiù—with whom; mayä—by me; saha—together;
yoddhavyam—have to fight; asmin—in this; raëa—strife; samudyame—in the
attempt.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies
so that I may see those present here, who desire to fight, and with whom I must
contend in this great trial of arms.

PURPORT

Although  Lord  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  out  of  His
causeless mercy He was engaged in the service of His friend. He never fails in
His affection for His devotees, and thus He is addressed herein as infallible. As
charioteer,  He  had  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  Arjuna,  and  since  He  did  not

hesitate to do so, He is addressed as infallible. Although He had accepted the
position  of  a  charioteer  for  His  devotee,  His  supreme  position  was  not
challenged.  In  all  circumstances,  He  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,
Håñékeça, the Lord of the total senses. The relationship between the Lord and
His servitor is very sweet and transcendental. The servitor is always ready to
render  service  to  the  Lord,  and,  similarly,  the  Lord  is  always  seeking  an
opportunity to render some service to the devotee. He takes greater pleasure in
His  pure  devotee’s  assuming  the  advantageous position of ordering Him than
He does in being the giver of orders. Since He is master, everyone is under His
orders, and no one is above Him to order Him. But when He finds that a pure
devotee  is  ordering  Him,  He  obtains  transcendental  pleasure,  although  He  is
the infallible master of all circumstances.

As  a  pure  devotee  of  the  Lord,  Arjuna  had  no  desire  to  fight  with  his
cousins  and  brothers,  but  he  was  forced  to  come  onto  the  battlefield  by  the
obstinacy  of  Duryodhana,  who  was  never  agreeable  to  any  peaceful
negotiation.  Therefore,  he  was  very  anxious  to  see  who  the  leading  persons
present  on  the  battlefield  were.  Although  there  was  no  question  of  a
peacemaking endeavor on the battlefield, he wanted to see them again, and to
see how much they were bent upon demanding an unwanted war.

TEXT  23

YaaeTSYaMaaNaaNave+ae_h& Ya WTae_}a SaMaaGaTaa" )

DaaTaRraí\SYa dubuRÖeYauRÖe iPa[Yaick-IzRv" )) 23 ))

yotsyamänän avekñe ’haà
ya ete ’tra samägatäù
dhärtaräñörasya durbuddher
yuddhe priya-cikérñavaù

SYNONYMS

yotsyamänän—those who will be fighting; avekñe—let me see; aham—I;

ye—who; ete—those; atra—here; samägatäù—assembled; dhärtaräñörasya—for
the son of Dhåtaräñöra; durbuddheù—evil-minded; yuddhe—in the fight;
priya—well; cikérñavaù—wishing.

TRANSLATION

Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the

evil-minded son of Dhåtaräñöra.

PURPORT

It was an open secret that Duryodhana wanted to usurp the kingdom of the
Päëòavas  by  evil  plans,  in  collaboration  with  his  father,  Dhåtaräñöra.
Therefore, all persons who had joined the side of Duryodhana must have been
birds of the same feather. Arjuna wanted to see them on the battlefield before
the fight was begun, just to learn who they were, but he had no intention of
proposing  peace  negotiations  with  them.  It  was  also  a  fact  that  he  wanted  to
see them to make an estimate of the strength which he had to face, although
he was quite confident of victory because Kåñëa was sitting by his side.

TEXT  24

SaÅYa ovac

WvMau¢-ae ôzqke-Xaae Gau@ake-XaeNa >aarTa )

SaeNaYaaeå>aYaaeMaRDYae SQaaPaiYaTva rQaaetaMaMa( )) 24 ))

saïjaya uväca
evam ukto håñékeço
guòäkeçena bhärata
senayor ubhayor madhye
sthäpayitvä rathottamam

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; evam—thus; uktaù—addressed; håñékeçaù—Lord
Kåñëa; guòäkeçena—by Arjuna; bhärata—O descendant of Bharata;
senayoù—of the armies; ubhayoù—both; madhye—in the midst;
sthäpayitvä—placing; ratha-uttamam—the finest chariot.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, having thus been addressed by

Arjuna, Lord Kåñëa drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both
parties.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  Arjuna  is  referred  to  as  Guòäkeça.  Guòäkä  means  sleep,  and
one  who  conquers  sleep  is  called  guòäkeça.  Sleep  also  means  ignorance.  So
Arjuna  conquered  both  sleep  and  ignorance  because  of  his  friendship  with
Kåñëa.  As  a  great  devotee  of  Kåñëa,  he  could  not  forget  Kåñëa  even  for  a
moment, because that is the nature of a devotee. Either in waking or in sleep, a
devotee  of  the  Lord  can  never  be  free  from  thinking  of  Kåñëa’s  name,  form,
qualities  and  pastimes.  Thus  a  devotee  of  Kåñëa  can  conquer  both  sleep  and
ignorance  simply  by  thinking  of  Kåñëa  constantly.  This  is  called  Kåñëa
consciousness, or samädhi. As Håñékeça, or the director of the senses and mind
of every living entity, Kåñëa could understand Arjuna’s purpose in placing the
chariot in the midst of the armies. Thus He did so, and spoke as follows.

TEXT  25

>aqZMad]ae<aPa[Mau%Ta" SaveRza& c Mahqi+aTaaMa( )

ovac PaaQaR PaXYaETaaNSaMaveTaaNku-æiNaiTa )) 25 ))

bhéñma-droëa-pramukhataù
sarveñäà ca mahé-kñitäm
uväca pärtha paçyaitän
samavetän kurün iti

SYNONYMS

bhéñma—Grandfather Bhéñma; droëa—the teacher Droëa; pramukhataù—in
front of; sarveñäm—all; ca—also; mahé-kñitäm—chiefs of the world;
uväca—said; pärtha—O son of Påthä; paçya—just behold; etän—all of them;
samavetän—assembled; kurün—the members of the Kuru dynasty; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

In the presence of Bhéñma, Droëa and all the other chieftains of the world,

the Lord said, Just behold, Pärtha, all the Kurus assembled here.

PURPORT

As  the  Supersoul  of  all  living  entities,  Lord  Kåñëa  could  understand  what
was  going  on  in  the  mind  of  Arjuna.  The  use  of  the  word  Håñékeça  in  this
connection  indicates  that  He  knew  everything.  And  the  word  Pärtha,  or  the
son of Kunté, or Påthä, is also similarly significant in reference to Arjuna. As a
friend, He wanted to inform Arjuna that because Arjuna was the son of Påthä,
the sister of His own father Vasudeva, He had agreed to be the charioteer of
Arjuna.  Now  what  did  Kåñëa  mean  when  He  told  Arjuna  to  “behold  the
Kurus”?  Did  Arjuna  want  to  stop  there  and  not  fight?  Kåñëa  never  expected
such  things  from  the  son  of  His  aunt  Påthä.  The  mind  of  Arjuna  was  thus
predicted by the Lord in friendly joking.

TEXT  26

Ta}aaPaXYaiTSQaTaaNPaaQaR" iPaTa›NaQa iPaTaaMahaNa( )

AacaYaaRNMaaTaul/aN>a]aTa›NPau}aaNPaaE}aaNSa%q„&STaQaa )

ìéuraNSauôdêEv SaeNaYaaeå>aYaaeriPa )) 26 ))

taträpaçyat sthitän pärthaù
pitèn atha pitämahän

äcäryän mätulän bhrätèn
puträn pauträn sakhéàs tathä
çvaçurän suhådaç caiva
senayor ubhayor api

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; apaçyat—he could see; sthitän—standing; pärthaù—Arjuna;
pitèn—fathers; atha—also; pitämahän—grandfathers; äcäryän—teachers;
mätulän—maternal uncles; bhrätèn—brothers; puträn—sons;
pauträn—grandsons; sakhén—friends; tathä—too; çvaçurän—fathers-in-law;
suhådaù—well-wishers; ca—also; eva—certainly; senayoù—of the armies;
ubhayoù—of both parties; api—including.

TRANSLATION

There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties, his

fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons,
friends, and also his fathers-in-law and well-wishers.

PURPORT

On  the  battlefield  Arjuna  could  see  all  kinds  of  relatives.  He  could  see
persons  like  Bhüriçravä,  who  were  his  father’s  contemporaries,  grandfathers
Bhéñma  and  Somadatta,  teachers  like  Droëäcärya  and  Kåpäcärya,  maternal
uncles  like  Çalya  and  Çakuni,  brothers  like  Duryodhana,  sons  like  Lakñmaëa,
friends  like  Açvatthämä,  well-wishers  like  Kåtavarmä,  etc.  He  could  see  also
the armies which contained many of his friends.

TEXT  27

TaaNSaMaq+Ya Sa k-aENTaeYa" SavaRNbNDaUNaviSQaTaaNa( )

k*-PaYaa ParYaaivíae ivzqdiàdMab]vqTa( )) 27 ))

tän samékñya sa kaunteyaù
sarvän bandhün avasthitän
kåpayä parayäviñöo
viñédann idam abravét

SYNONYMS

tän—all of them; samékñya—after seeing; saù—he; kaunteyaù—the son of
Kunté; sarvän—all kinds of; bandhün—relatives; avasthitän—situated;
kåpayä—by compassion; parayä—of a high grade; äviñöaù—overwhelmed;
viñédan—while lamenting; idam—thus; abravét—spoke.

TRANSLATION

When the son of Kunté, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and

relatives, he became overwhelmed with compassion and spoke thus.

TEXT  28

AJauRNa ovac

d*îeMa& SvJaNa& k*-Z<a YauYauTSau& SaMauPaiSQaTaMa( )

SaqdiNTa MaMa Gaa}aai<a Mau%& c PairéuZYaiTa )) 28 ))

arjuna uväca
dåñövemaà sva-janaà kåñëa
yuyutsuà samupasthitam
sédanti mama gäträëi
mukhaà ca pariçuñyati

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; dåñövä—after seeing; imam—all these;
sva-janam—kinsmen; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; yuyutsum—all in a fighting spirit;
samupasthitam—present; sédanti—are quivering; mama—my; gäträëi—limbs

of the body; mukham—mouth; ca—also; pariçuñyati—is drying up.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: My dear Kåñëa, seeing my friends and relatives present before

me in such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my
mouth drying up.

PURPORT

Any man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities
which are found in godly persons or in the demigods, whereas the nondevotee,
however  advanced  he  may  be  in  material  qualifications  by  education  and
culture, lacks in godly qualities. As such, Arjuna, just after seeing his kinsmen,
friends  and  relatives  on  the  battlefield,  was  at  once  overwhelmed  by
compassion for them who had so decided to fight amongst themselves. As far as
his  soldiers  were  concerned,  he  was  sympathetic  from  the  beginning,  but  he
felt  compassion  even  for  the  soldiers  of  the  opposite  party,  foreseeing  their
imminent death. And while he was so thinking, the limbs of his body began to
quiver, and his mouth became dry. He was more or less astonished to see their
fighting spirit. Practically the whole community, all blood relatives of Arjuna,
had  come  to  fight  with  him.  This  overwhelmed  a  kind  devotee  like  Arjuna.
Although it is not mentioned here, still one can easily imagine that not only
were Arjuna’s bodily limbs quivering and his mouth drying up, but he was also
crying out of compassion. Such symptoms in Arjuna were not due to weakness
but to his softheartedness, a characteristic of a pure devotee of the Lord. It is
said therefore:

yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
mano-rathenäsati dhävato bahiù

“One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has all
the good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee of the Lord

has  only  material  qualifications  that  are  of  little  value.  This  is  because  he  is
hovering  on  the  mental  plane  and  is  certain  to  be  attracted  by  the  glaring
material energy.” (Bhäg. 5.18.12)

TEXT  29

vePaQauê Xarqre Mae raeMahzRê JaaYaTae )

Gaa<@qv& ó&SaTae hSTaatvKcEv PairdùTae )) 29 ))

vepathuç ca çarére me
roma-harñaç ca jäyate
gäëòévaà sraàsate hastät
tvak caiva paridahyate

SYNONYMS

vepathuù—trembling of the body; ca—also; çarére—on the body; me—my;
roma-harñaù—standing of hair on end; ca—also; jäyate—is taking place;
gäëòévam—the bow of Arjuna; sraàsate—is slipping; hastät—from the hand;
tvak—skin; ca—also; eva—certainly; paridahyate—is burning.

TRANSLATION

My whole body is trembling, my hair is standing on end, my bow Gäëòéva is

slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning.

PURPORT

There are two kinds of trembling of the body, and two kinds of standings of
the hair on end. Such phenomena occur either in great spiritual ecstasy or out
of  great  fear  under  material  conditions.  There  is  no  fear  in  transcendental
realization.  Arjuna’s  symptoms 
in  this  situation  are  out  of  material
fear—namely, loss of life. This is evident from other symptoms also; he became
so  impatient  that  his  famous  bow  Gäëòéva  was  slipping  from  his  hands,  and,

because his heart was burning within him, he was feeling a burning sensation
of the skin. All these are due to a material conception of life.

TEXT  30

Na c Xa¥-aeMYavSQaaTau& >a]MaTaqv c Mae MaNa" )

iNaiMataaiNa c PaXYaaiMa ivParqTaaiNa ke-Xav )) 30 ))

na ca çaknomy avasthätuà
bhramatéva ca me manaù
nimittäni ca paçyämi
viparétäni keçava

SYNONYMS

na—nor; ca—also; çaknomi—am I able; avasthätum—to stay;
bhramati—forgetting; iva—as; ca—and; me—my; manaù—mind;
nimittäni—causes; ca—also; paçyämi—I see; viparétäni—just the opposite;
keçava—O killer of the demon Keçé (Kåñëa).

TRANSLATION

I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and my

mind is reeling. I see only causes of misfortune, O Kåñëa, killer of the Keçé
demon.

PURPORT

Due to his impatience, Arjuna was unable to stay on the battlefield, and he
was  forgetting  himself  on  account  of  this  weakness  of  his  mind.  Excessive
attachment for material things puts a man in such a bewildering condition of
existence. Bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät (Bhäg. 11.2.37): such fearfulness and
loss  of  mental  equilibrium  take  place  in  persons  who  are  too  affected  by
in  the
material  conditions.  Arjuna  envisioned  only  painful  reverses 

battlefield—he would not be happy even by gaining victory over the foe. The
words nimittäni viparétäni are significant. When a man sees only frustration in
his expectations, he thinks, “Why am I here?” Everyone is interested in himself
and  his  own  welfare.  No  one  is  interested  in  the  Supreme  Self.  Arjuna  is
showing  ignorance  of  his  real  self-interest  by  Kåñëa’s  will.  One’s  real
self-interest  lies  in  Viñëu,  or  Kåñëa.  The  conditioned  soul  forgets  this,  and
therefore suffers material pains. Arjuna thought that his victory in the battle
would only be a cause of lamentation for him.

TEXT  31

Na c é[eYaae_NauPaXYaaiMa hTva SvJaNaMaahve )

Na k-a¿e ivJaYa& k*-Z<a Na c raJYa& Sau%aiNa c )) 31 ))

na ca çreyo ’nupaçyämi
hatvä sva-janam ähave
na käìkñe vijayaà kåñëa
na ca räjyaà sukhäni ca

SYNONYMS

na—nor; ca—also; çreyaù—good; anupaçyämi—do I foresee; hatvä—by killing;
sva-janam—own kinsmen; ähave—in the fight; na—nor; käìkñe—do I desire;
vijayam—victory; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; na—nor; ca—also; räjyam—kingdom;
sukhäni—happiness thereof; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this
battle, nor can I, my dear Kåñëa, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom, or
happiness.

PURPORT

Without  knowing  that  one’s  self-interest  is  in  Viñëu  (or  Kåñëa),
conditioned souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to be happy in
such situations. In such a blind conception of life, they forget even the causes
of material happiness. Arjuna appears to have even forgotten the moral codes
for  a  kñatriya.  It  is  said  that  two  kinds  of  men,  namely  the  kñatriya  who  dies
directly  in  front  of  the  battlefield  under  Kåñëa’s  personal  orders  and  the
person  in  the  renounced  order  of  life  who  is  absolutely  devoted  to  spiritual
culture,  are  eligible  to  enter  into  the  sun  globe,  which  is  so  powerful  and
dazzling. Arjuna is reluctant even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He
thinks that by killing his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life, and
therefore he is not willing to fight, just as a person who does not feel hunger is
not  inclined  to  cook.  He  has  now  decided  to  go  into  the  forest  and  live  a
secluded  life  in  frustration.  But  as  a  kñatriya,  he  requires  a  kingdom  for  his
subsistence,  because  the  kñatriyas  cannot  engage  themselves  in  any  other
occupation. But Arjuna has no kingdom. Arjuna’s sole opportunity for gaining
a  kingdom  lies  in  fighting  with  his  cousins  and  brothers  and  reclaiming  the
kingdom inherited from his father, which he does not like to do. Therefore he
considers himself fit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.

TEXTS  32–35

ik&- Naae raJYaeNa GaaeivNd ik&- >aaeGaEJas„ivTaeNa va )

YaezaMaQaeR k-ax(i+aTa& Naae raJYa& >aaeGaa" Sau%aiNa c )) 32 ))

Ta wMae_viSQaTaa YauÖe Pa[a<aa&STYa¤-a DaNaaiNa c )

AacaYaaR" iPaTar" Pau}aaSTaQaEv c iPaTaaMaha" )) 33 ))

MaaTaul/a" ìéura" PaaE}aa" XYaal/a" SaMbiNDaNaSTaQaa )

WTaaà hNTauiMaC^aiMa ganTaae_iPa MaDauSaUdNa )) 34 ))

AiPa }aEl/aeKYaraJYaSYa heTaae" ik&- Nau Mahqk*-Tae )

iNahTYa DaaTaRraí\aà" k-a Pa[qiTa" SYaaÂNaadRNa )) 35 ))

kià no räjyena govinda

kià bhogair jévitena vä
yeñäm arthe käìkñitaà no
räjyaà bhogäù sukhäni ca

ta ime ’vasthitä yuddhe
präëäàs tyaktvä dhanäni ca
äcäryäù pitaraù puträs
tathaiva ca pitämahäù

mätuläù çvaçuräù pauträù
çyäläù sambandhinas tathä
etän na hantum icchämi
ghnato ’pi madhusüdana

api trailokya-räjyasya
hetoù kià nu mahé-kåte
nihatya dhärtaräñörän naù
kä prétiù syäj janärdana

SYNONYMS

kim—what use; naù—to us; räjyena—is the kingdom; govinda—O Kåñëa;
kim—what; bhogaiù—enjoyment; jévitena—living; vä—either; yeñäm—of
whom; arthe—for the sake; käìkñitam—is desired; naù—by us;
räjyam—kingdom; bhogäù—material enjoyment; sukhäni—all happiness;
ca—also; te—all of them; ime—these; avasthitäù—situated; yuddhe—on this
battlefield; präëän—lives; tyaktvä—giving up; dhanäni—riches; ca—also;
äcäryäù—teachers; pitaraù—fathers; puträù—sons; tathä—as well as;
eva—certainly; ca—also; pitämahäù—grandfathers; mätuläù—maternal
uncles; çvaçuräù—fathers-in-law; pauträù—grandsons;
çyäläù—brothers-in-law; sambandhinaù—relatives; tathä—as well as; etän—all
these; na—never; hantum—to kill; icchämi—do I wish; ghnataù—being killed;
api—even; madhusüdana—O killer of the demon Madhu (Kåñëa); api—even
if; trai-lokya—of the three worlds; räjyasya—for the kingdom; hetoù—in
exchange; kim nu—what to speak of; mahé-kåte—for the sake of the earth;

nihatya—by killing; dhärtaräñörän—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra; naù—our;
kä—what; prétiù—pleasure; syät—will there be; janärdana—O maintainer of
all living entities.

TRANSLATION

O Govinda, of what avail to us are a kingdom, happiness or even life itself

when all those for whom we may desire them are now arrayed on this
battlefield? O Madhusüdana, when teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers,
maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other relatives
are ready to give up their lives and properties and are standing before me, why
should I wish to kill them, even though they might otherwise kill me? O
maintainer of all living entities, I am not prepared to fight with them even in
exchange for the three worlds, let alone this earth. What pleasure will we derive
from killing the sons of Dhåtaräñöra?

PURPORT

Arjuna has addressed Lord Kåñëa as Govinda because Kåñëa is the object of
all  pleasures  for  cows  and  the  senses.  By  using  this  significant  word,  Arjuna
indicates that Kåñëa should understand what will satisfy Arjuna’s senses. But
Govinda is not meant for satisfying our senses. If we try to satisfy the senses of
Govinda, however, then automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially,
everyone wants to satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the order supplier
for  such  satisfaction.  The  Lord  will  satisfy  the  senses  of  the  living  entities  as
much as they deserve, but not to the extent that they may covet. But when one
takes  the  opposite  way—namely,  when  one  tries  to  satisfy  the  senses  of
Govinda  without  desiring  to  satisfy  one’s  own  senses—then  by  the  grace  of
Govinda  all  desires  of  the  living  entity  are  satisfied.  Arjuna’s  deep  affection
for community and family members is exhibited here partly due to his natural
compassion for them. He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to
show  his  opulence  to  friends  and  relatives,  but  Arjuna  fears  that  all  his
relatives and friends will be killed on the battlefield and he will be unable to
share  his  opulence  after  victory.  This  is  a  typical  calculation  of  material  life.

The transcendental life, however, is different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy
the desires of the Lord, he can, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for
the service of the Lord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a
farthing. Arjuna did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any need
to kill them, he desired that Kåñëa  kill them personally. At this point he did
not  know  that  Kåñëa  had  already  killed  them  before  their  coming  into  the
battlefield and that he was only to become an instrument for Kåñëa. This fact
is disclosed in following chapters. As a natural devotee of the Lord, Arjuna did
not like to retaliate against his miscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the
Lord’s  plan  that  they  should  all  be  killed.  The  devotee  of  the  Lord  does  not
retaliate  against  the  wrongdoer,  but  the  Lord  does  not  tolerate  any  mischief
done to the devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on His
own  account,  but  He  excuses  no  one  who  has  done  harm  to  His  devotees.
Therefore  the  Lord  was  determined  to  kill  the  miscreants,  although  Arjuna
wanted to excuse them.

TEXT  36

PaaPaMaevaé[YaedSMaaNhTvETaaNaaTaTaaiYaNa" )

TaSMaaàahaR vYa& hNTau& DaaTaRraí\aNSabaNDavaNa( )

SvJaNa& ih k-Qa& hTva Saui%Na" SYaaMa MaaDav )) 36 ))

päpam eväçrayed asmän
hatvaitän ätatäyinaù
tasmän närhä vayaà hantuà
dhärtaräñörän sa-bändhavän
sva-janaà hi kathaà hatvä
sukhinaù syäma mädhava

SYNONYMS

päpam—vices; eva—certainly; äçrayet—must come upon; asmän—us;
hatvä—by killing; etän—all these; ätatäyinaù—aggressors; tasmät—therefore;

na—never; arhäù—deserving; vayam—we; hantum—to kill;
dhärtaräñörän—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra; sa-bändhavän—along with friends;
sva-janam—kinsmen; hi—certainly; katham—how; hatvä—by killing;
sukhinaù—happy; syäma—will we become; mädhava—O Kåñëa, husband of
the goddess of fortune.

TRANSLATION

Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not proper for

us to kill the sons of Dhåtaräñöra and our friends. What should we gain, O
Kåñëa, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how could we be happy by killing
our own kinsmen?

PURPORT

According  to  Vedic  injunctions  there  are  six  kinds  of  aggressors:  (1)  a
poison  giver,  (2)  one  who  sets  fire  to  the  house,  (3)  one  who  attacks  with
deadly weapons, (4) one who plunders riches, (5) one who occupies another’s
land, and (6) one who kidnaps a wife. Such aggressors are at once to be killed,
and  no  sin  is  incurred  by  killing  such  aggressors.  Such  killing  of  aggressors  is
quite befitting any ordinary man, but Arjuna was not an ordinary person. He
was  saintly  by  character,  and  therefore  he  wanted  to  deal  with  them  in
saintliness. This kind of saintliness, however, is not for a kñatriya. Although a
responsible  man  in  the  administration  of  a  state  is  required  to  be  saintly,  he
should  not  be  cowardly.  For  example,  Lord  Räma  was  so  saintly  that  people
even now are anxious to live in the kingdom of Lord Räma (räma-räjya), but
Lord  Räma  never  showed  any  cowardice.  Rävaëa  was  an  aggressor  against
Räma because Rävaëa kidnapped Räma’s wife, Sétä, but Lord Räma gave him
sufficient  lessons,  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  world.  In  Arjuna’s  case,
however,  one  should  consider  the  special  type  of  aggressors,  namely  his  own
grandfather,  own  teacher,  friends,  sons,  grandsons,  etc.  Because  of  them,
Arjuna  thought  that  he  should  not  take  the  severe  steps  necessary  against
ordinary  aggressors.  Besides  that,  saintly  persons  are  advised  to  forgive.  Such
injunctions  for  saintly  persons  are  more  important  than  any  political

emergency.  Arjuna  considered  that  rather  than  kill  his  own  kinsmen  for
political reasons, it would be better to forgive them on grounds of religion and
saintly behavior. He did not, therefore, consider such killing profitable simply
for  the  matter  of  temporary  bodily  happiness.  After  all,  kingdoms  and
pleasures derived therefrom are not permanent, so why should he risk his life
and eternal salvation by killing his own kinsmen? Arjuna’s addressing of Kåñëa
as “Mädhava,” or the husband of the goddess of fortune, is also significant in
this  connection.  He  wanted  to  point  out  to  Kåñëa  that,  as  husband  of  the
goddess  of  fortune,  He  should  not  induce  Arjuna  to  take  up  a  matter  which
would  ultimately  bring  about  misfortune.  Kåñëa,  however,  never  brings
misfortune to anyone, to say nothing of His devotees.

TEXTS  37–38

YaÛPYaeTae Na PaXYaiNTa l/ae>aaePahTaceTaSa" )

ku-l/+aYak*-Ta& daez& iMa}ad]aehe c PaaTak-Ma( )) 37 ))

k-Qa& Na jeYaMaSMaai>a" PaaPaadSMaaiàviTaRTauMa( )

ku-l/+aYak*-Ta& daez& Pa[PaXYaiÙJaRNaadRNa )) 38 ))

yady apy ete na paçyanti
lobhopahata-cetasaù
kula-kñaya-kåtaà doñaà
mitra-drohe ca pätakam

kathaà na jïeyam asmäbhiù
päpäd asmän nivartitum
kula-kñaya-kåtaà doñaà
prapaçyadbhir janärdana

SYNONYMS

yadi—if; api—even; ete—they; na—do not; paçyanti—see; lobha—by greed;
upahata—overpowered; cetasaù—their hearts; kula-kñaya—in killing the
family; kåtam—done; doñam—fault; mitra-drohe—in quarreling with friends;

ca—also; pätakam—sinful reactions; katham—why; na—should not;
jïeyam—be known; asmäbhiù—by us; päpät—from sins; asmät—these;
nivartitum—to cease; kula-kñaya—in the destruction of a dynasty;
kåtam—done; doñam—crime; prapaçyadbhiù—by those who can see;
janärdana—O Kåñëa.

TRANSLATION

O Janärdana, although these men, their hearts overtaken by greed, see no
fault in killing one’s family or quarreling with friends, why should we, who can
see the crime in destroying a family, engage in these acts of sin?

PURPORT

A  kñatriya  is  not  supposed  to  refuse  to  battle  or  gamble  when  he  is  so
invited by some rival party. Under such an obligation, Arjuna could not refuse
to fight, because he had been challenged by the party of Duryodhana. In this
connection,  Arjuna  considered  that  the  other  party  might  be  blind  to  the
effects of such a challenge. Arjuna, however, could see the evil consequences
and  could  not  accept  the  challenge.  Obligation  is  actually  binding  when  the
effect  is  good,  but  when  the  effect  is  otherwise,  then  no  one  can  be  bound.
Considering all these pros and cons, Arjuna decided not to fight.

TEXT  39

ku-l/+aYae Pa[<aXYaiNTa ku-l/DaMaaR" SaNaaTaNaa" )

DaMaeR Naíe ku-l&/ k*-TòMaDaMaaeR_i>a>avTYauTa )) 39 ))

kula-kñaye praëaçyanti
kula-dharmäù sanätanäù
dharme nañöe kulaà kåtsnam
adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

SYNONYMS

kula-kñaye—in destroying the family; praëaçyanti—become vanquished;
kula-dharmäù—the family traditions; sanätanäù—eternal; dharme—religion;
nañöe—being destroyed; kulam—family; kåtsnam—whole;
adharmaù—irreligion; abhibhavati—transforms; uta—it is said.

TRANSLATION

With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is vanquished,

and thus the rest of the family becomes involved in irreligion.

PURPORT

In  the  system  of  the  varëäçrama  institution  there  are  many  principles  of
religious  traditions  to  help  members  of  the  family  grow  properly  and  attain
spiritual values. The elder members are responsible for such purifying processes
in  the  family,  beginning  from  birth  to  death.  But  on  the  death  of  the  elder
members,  such  family  traditions  of  purification  may  stop,  and  the  remaining
younger family members may develop irreligious habits and thereby lose their
chance  for  spiritual  salvation.  Therefore,  for  no  purpose  should  the  elder
members of the family be slain.

TEXT  40

ADaMaaRi>a>avaTk*-Z<a Pa[duZYaiNTa ku-l/iñYa" )

ñqzu duíaSau vaZ<aeRYa JaaYaTae v<aRSaªr" )) 40 ))

adharmäbhibhavät kåñëa
praduñyanti kula-striyaù
stréñu duñöäsu värñëeya
jäyate varëa-saìkaraù

SYNONYMS

adharma—irreligion; abhibhavät—having become predominant; kåñëa—O
Kåñëa; praduñyanti—become polluted; kula-striyaù—family ladies; stréñu—by
the womanhood; duñöäsu—being so polluted; värñëeya—O descendant of
Våñëi; jäyate—comes into being; varëa-saìkaraù—unwanted progeny.

TRANSLATION

When irreligion is prominent in the family, O Kåñëa, the women of the
family become polluted, and from the degradation of womanhood, O descendant
of Våñëi, comes unwanted progeny.

PURPORT

Good  population  in  human  society  is  the  basic  principle  for  peace,
prosperity  and  spiritual  progress  in  life.  The  varëäçrama  religion’s  principles
were  so  designed  that  the  good  population  would  prevail  in  society  for  the
general spiritual progress of state and community. Such population depends on
the chastity and faithfulness of its womanhood. As children are very prone to
be  misled,  women  are  similarly  very  prone  to  degradation.  Therefore,  both
children and women require protection by the elder members of the family. By
being  engaged  in  various  religious  practices,  women  will  not  be  misled  into
adultery.  According  to  Cäëakya  Paëòita,  women  are  generally  not  very
intelligent and therefore not trustworthy. So the different family traditions of
religious  activities  should  always  engage  them,  and  thus  their  chastity  and
devotion  will  give  birth  to  a  good  population  eligible  for  participating  in  the
varëäçrama  system.  On  the  failure  of  such  varëäçrama-dharma,  naturally  the
women become free to act and mix with men, and thus adultery is indulged in
at the risk of unwanted population. Irresponsible men also provoke adultery in
society,  and  thus  unwanted  children  flood  the  human  race  at  the  risk  of  war
and pestilence.

TEXT  41

Saªrae Nark-aYaEv ku-l/ganaNaa& ku-l/SYa c )

PaTaiNTa iPaTarae ùeza& lu/áiPa<@aedk-i§-Yaa" )) 41 ))

saìkaro narakäyaiva
kula-ghnänäà kulasya ca
patanti pitaro hy eñäà
lupta-piëòodaka-kriyäù

SYNONYMS

saìkaraù—such unwanted children; narakäya—make for hellish life;
eva—certainly; kula-ghnänäm—for those who are killers of the family;
kulasya—for the family; ca—also; patanti—fall down; pitaraù—forefathers;
hi—certainly; eñäm—of them; lupta—stopped; piëòa—of offerings of food;
udaka—and water; kriyäù—performances.

TRANSLATION

An increase of unwanted population certainly causes hellish life both for the

family and for those who destroy the family tradition. The ancestors of such
corrupt families fall down, because the performances for offering them food and
water are entirely stopped.

PURPORT

According to the rules and regulations of fruitive activities, there is a need
to  offer  periodical  food  and  water  to  the  forefathers  of  the  family.  This
offering is performed by worship of Viñëu, because eating the remnants of food
offered  to  Viñëu  can  deliver  one  from  all  kinds  of  sinful  actions.  Sometimes
the  forefathers  may  be  suffering  from  various  types  of  sinful  reactions,  and
sometimes  some  of  them  cannot  even  acquire  a  gross  material  body  and  are
forced to remain in subtle bodies as ghosts. Thus, when remnants of prasädam

food  are  offered  to  forefathers  by  descendants,  the  forefathers  are  released
from ghostly or other kinds of miserable life. Such help rendered to forefathers
is a family tradition, and those who are not in devotional life are required to
perform such rituals. One who is engaged in the devotional life is not required
to  perform  such  actions.  Simply  by  performing  devotional  service,  one  can
deliver  hundreds  and  thousands  of  forefathers  from  all  kinds  of  misery.  It  is
stated in the Bhägavatam (11.5.41):

devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam

“Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver of
liberation,  giving  up  all  kinds  of  obligation,  and  has  taken  to  the  path  in  all
seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to the demigods, sages, general
living  entities,  family  members,  humankind  or  forefathers.”  Such  obligations
are  automatically  fulfilled  by  performance  of  devotional  service  to  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  42

daezEreTaE" ku-l/ganaNaa& v<aRSaªrk-arkE-" )

oTSaaÛNTae JaaiTaDaMaaR" ku-l/DaMaaRê XaaìTaa" )) 42 ))

doñair etaiù kula-ghnänäà
varëa-saìkara-kärakaiù
utsädyante jäti-dharmäù
kula-dharmäç ca çäçvatäù

SYNONYMS

doñaiù—by such faults; etaiù—all these; kula-ghnänäm—of the destroyers of
the family; varëa-saìkara—of unwanted children; kärakaiù—which are
causes; utsädyante—are devastated; jäti-dharmäù—community projects;

kula-dharmäù—family traditions; ca—also; çäçvatäù—eternal.

TRANSLATION

By the evil deeds of those who destroy the family tradition and thus give rise

to unwanted children, all kinds of community projects and family welfare
activities are devastated.

PURPORT

Community  projects  for  the  four  orders  of  human  society,  combined  with
family  welfare  activities,  as  they  are  set  forth  by  the  institution  of
sanätana-dharma,  or  varëäçrama-dharma,  are  designed  to  enable  the  human
being  to  attain  his  ultimate  salvation.  Therefore,  the  breaking  of  the
sanätana-dharma  tradition  by  irresponsible  leaders  of  society  brings  about
chaos in that society, and consequently people forget the aim of life—Viñëu.
Such leaders are called blind, and persons who follow such leaders are sure to
be led into chaos.

TEXT  43

oTSaàku-l/DaMaaR<aa& MaNauZYaa<aa& JaNaadRNa )

Narke- iNaYaTa& vaSaae >avTaqTYaNauéué[uMa )) 43 ))

utsanna-kula-dharmäëäà
manuñyäëäà janärdana
narake niyataà väso
bhavatéty anuçuçruma

SYNONYMS

utsanna—spoiled; kula-dharmäëäm—of those who have the family traditions;
manuñyäëäm—of such men; janärdana—O Kåñëa; narake—in hell;
niyatam—always; väsaù—residence; bhavati—it so becomes; iti—thus;

anuçuçruma—I have heard by disciplic succession.

TRANSLATION

O Kåñëa, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession that

those who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.

PURPORT

Arjuna bases his argument not on his own personal experience, but on what
he has heard from the authorities. That is the way of receiving real knowledge.
One cannot reach the real point of factual knowledge without being helped by
the  right  person  who  is  already  established  in  that  knowledge.  There  is  a
system in the varëäçrama institution by which before death one has to undergo
the process of atonement for his sinful activities. One who is always engaged in
sinful  activities  must  utilize  the  process  of  atonement  called  the  präyaçcitta.
Without doing so, one surely will be transferred to hellish planets to undergo
miserable lives as the result of sinful activities.

TEXT  44

Ahae bTa MahTPaaPa& k-Tau| VYaviSaTaa vYaMa( )

Yad]aJYaSau%l/ae>aeNa hNTau& SvJaNaMauÛTaa" )) 44 ))

aho bata mahat päpaà
kartuà vyavasitä vayam
yad räjya-sukha-lobhena
hantuà sva-janam udyatäù

SYNONYMS

aho—alas; bata—how strange it is; mahat—great; päpam—sins; kartum—to
perform; vyavasitäù—have decided; vayam—we; yat—because;
räjya-sukha-lobhena—driven by greed for royal happiness; hantum—to kill;

sva-janam—kinsmen; udyatäù—trying.

TRANSLATION

Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful acts.
Driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness, we are intent on killing our own
kinsmen.

PURPORT

Driven  by  selfish  motives,  one  may  be  inclined  to  such  sinful  acts  as  the
killing of one’s own brother, father or mother. There are many such instances
in the history of the world. But Arjuna, being a saintly devotee of the Lord, is
always  conscious  of  moral  principles  and  therefore  takes  care  to  avoid  such
activities.

TEXT  45

Yaid MaaMaPa[Taqk-arMaXañ& XañPaa<aYa" )

DaaTaRraí\a r<ae hNYauSTaNMae +aeMaTar& >aveTa( )) 45 ))

yadi mäm apratékäram
açastraà çastra-päëayaù
dhärtaräñörä raëe hanyus
tan me kñemataraà bhavet

SYNONYMS

yadi—even if; mäm—me; apratékäram—without being resistant;
açastram—without being fully equipped; çastra-päëayaù—those with weapons
in hand; dhärtaräñöräù—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra; raëe—on the battlefield;
hanyuù—may kill; tat—that; me—for me; kñema-taram—better;
bhavet—would be.

TRANSLATION

Better for me if the sons of Dhåtaräñöra, weapons in hand, were to kill me

unarmed and unresisting on the battlefield.

PURPORT

It  is  the  custom—according  to  kñatriya  fighting  principles—that  an
unarmed and unwilling foe should not be attacked. Arjuna, however, decided
that even if attacked by the enemy in such an awkward position, he would not
fight. He did not consider how much the other party was bent upon fighting.
All these symptoms are due to soft-heartedness resulting from his being a great
devotee of the Lord.

TEXT  46

SaÅYa ovac

WvMau¤-aJauRNa" Sa&:Yae rQaaePaSQa oPaaivXaTa( )

ivSa*JYa SaXar& caPa& Xaaek-Sa&ivGanMaaNaSa" )) 46 ))

saïjaya uväca
evam uktvärjunaù saìkhye
rathopastha upäviçat
visåjya sa-çaraà cäpaà
çoka-saàvigna-mänasaù

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; evam—thus; uktvä—saying; arjunaù—Arjuna;
saìkhye—in the battlefield; ratha—of the chariot; upasthe—on the seat;
upäviçat—sat down again; visåjya—putting aside; sa-çaram—along with
arrows; cäpam—the bow; çoka—by lamentation; saàvigna—distressed;
mänasaù—within the mind.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his
bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with grief.

PURPORT

While observing the situation of his enemy, Arjuna stood up on the chariot,
but he was so afflicted with lamentation that he sat down again, setting aside
his  bow  and  arrows.  Such  a  kind  and  soft-hearted  person,  in  the  devotional
service of the Lord, is fit to receive self-knowledge.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the First Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra.

- CHAPTER 2 -
Contents of the Gétä Summarized

TEXT  1

SaÅYa ovac

Ta& TaQaa k*-PaYaaivíMaé[uPaU<aaRku-le/+a<aMa( )

ivzqdNTaiMad& vaKYaMauvac MaDauSaUdNa" )) 1 ))

saïjaya uväca
taà tathä kåpayäviñöam

açru-pürëäkulekñaëam
viñédantam idaà väkyam
uväca madhusüdanaù

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; tam—unto Arjuna; tathä—thus; kåpayä—by
compassion; äviñöam—overwhelmed; açru-pürëa-äkula—full of tears;
ékñaëam—eyes; viñédantam—lamenting; idam—these; väkyam—words;
uväca—said; madhu-südanaù—the killer of Madhu.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion, his mind depressed, his eyes

full of tears, Madhusüdana, Kåñëa, spoke the following words.

PURPORT

Material compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance of the
real  self.  Compassion  for  the  eternal  soul  is  self-realization.  The  word
“Madhusüdana”  is  significant  in  this  verse.  Lord  Kåñëa  killed  the  demon
Madhu, and now Arjuna wanted Kåñëa to kill the demon of misunderstanding
that  had  overtaken  him  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty.  No  one  knows  where
compassion should be applied. Compassion for the dress of a drowning man is
senseless.  A  man  fallen  in  the  ocean  of  nescience  cannot  be  saved  simply  by
rescuing his outward dress—the gross material body. One who does not know
this  and  laments  for  the  outward  dress  is  called  a  çüdra,  or  one  who  laments
unnecessarily. Arjuna was a kñatriya, and this conduct was not expected from
him. Lord Kåñëa, however, can dissipate the lamentation of the ignorant man,
and for this purpose the Bhagavad-gétä was sung by Him. This chapter instructs
us in self-realization by an analytical study of the material body and the spirit
soul, as explained by the supreme authority, Lord Çré Kåñëa. This realization is
possible when one works without attachment to fruitive results and is situated
in the fixed conception of the real self.

TEXT  2

é[q>aGavaNauvac

ku-TaSTva k-XMal/iMad& ivzMae SaMauPaiSQaTaMa( )

ANaaYaRJauíMaSvGYaRMak-IiTaRk-rMaJauRNa )) 2 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
kutas tvä kaçmalam idaà
viñame samupasthitam
anärya-juñöam asvargyam
akérti-karam arjuna

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
kutaù—wherefrom; tvä—unto you; kaçmalam—dirtiness; idam—this
lamentation; viñame—in this hour of crisis; samupasthitam—arrived;
anärya—persons who do not know the value of life; juñöam—practiced by;
asvargyam—which does not lead to higher planets; akérti—infamy;
karam—the cause of; arjuna—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, how have these

impurities come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knows the
value of life. They lead not to higher planets but to infamy.

PURPORT

Kåñëa  and  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  are  identical.  Therefore
Lord  Kåñëa  is  referred  to  as  Bhagavän  throughout  the  Gétä.  Bhagavän  is  the
ultimate in the Absolute Truth. Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of
understanding,  namely  Brahman,  or  the  impersonal  all-pervasive  spirit;

Paramätmä,  or  the  localized  aspect  of  the  Supreme  within  the  heart  of  all
living  entities;  and  Bhagavän,  or  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Lord
Kåñëa.  In  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (1.2.11)  this  conception  of  the  Absolute
Truth is explained thus:

vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate

“The  Absolute  Truth  is  realized  in  three  phases  of  understanding  by  the
knower  of  the  Absolute  Truth,  and  all  of  them  are  identical.  Such  phases  of
the Absolute Truth are expressed as Brahman, Paramätmä, and Bhagavän.”

These  three  divine  aspects  can  be  explained  by  the  example  of  the  sun,
which also has three different aspects, namely the sunshine, the sun’s surface
and the sun planet itself. One who studies the sunshine only is the preliminary
student. One who understands the sun’s surface is further advanced. And one
who  can  enter  into  the  sun  planet  is  the  highest.  Ordinary  students  who  are
satisfied  by  simply  understanding  the  sunshine—its  universal  pervasiveness
and the glaring effulgence of its impersonal nature—may be compared to those
who can realize only the Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth. The student
who  has  advanced  still  further  can  know  the  sun  disc,  which  is  compared  to
knowledge of the Paramätmä feature of the Absolute Truth. And the student
who  can  enter  into  the  heart  of  the  sun  planet  is  compared  to  those  who
realize  the  personal  features  of  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth.  Therefore,  the
bhaktas,  or  the  transcendentalists  who  have  realized  the  Bhagavän  feature  of
the Absolute Truth, are the topmost transcendentalists, although all students
who are engaged in the study of the Absolute Truth are engaged in the same
subject  matter.  The  sunshine,  the  sun  disc  and  the  inner  affairs  of  the  sun
planet cannot be separated from one another, and yet the students of the three
different phases are not in the same category.

The  Sanskrit  word  bhagavän  is  explained  by  the  great  authority  Paräçara
Muni,  the  father  of  Vyäsadeva.  The  Supreme  Personality  who  possesses  all
riches, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge and all renunciation is

called  Bhagavän.  There  are  many  persons  who  are  very  rich,  very  powerful,
very beautiful, very famous, very learned, and very much detached, but no one
can  claim  that  he  possesses  all  riches,  all  strength,  etc.,  entirely.  Only  Kåñëa
can  claim  this  because  He  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  No  living
entity,  including  Brahmä,  Lord  Çiva,  or  Näräyaëa,  can  possess  opulences  as
fully  as  Kåñëa.  Therefore  it  is  concluded  in  the  Brahma-saàhitä  by  Lord
Brahmä  himself  that  Lord  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  No
one is equal to or above Him. He is the primeval Lord, or Bhagavän, known as
Govinda, and He is the supreme cause of all causes:

éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam

“There  are  many  personalities  possessing  the  qualities  of  Bhagavän,  but
Kåñëa is the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the Supreme Person,
and  His  body  is  eternal,  full  of  knowledge  and  bliss.  He  is  the  primeval  Lord
Govinda and the cause of all causes.” (Brahma-saàhitä 5.1)

In the Bhägavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  but  Kåñëa  is  described  as  the  original  Personality  of
Godhead, from whom many, many incarnations and Personalities of Godhead
expand:

ete cäàça-kaläù puàsaù
kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam
indräri-vyäkulaà lokaà
måòayanti yuge yuge

“All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are either
plenary  expansions  or  parts  of  the  plenary  expansions  of  the  Supreme
Godhead, but Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself.” (Bhäg.
1.3.28)

Therefore,  Kåñëa  is  the  original  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the
Absolute  Truth,  the  source  of  both  the  Supersoul  and  the  impersonal

Brahman.

In  the  presence  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Arjuna’s
lamentation  for  his  kinsmen  is  certainly  unbecoming,  and  therefore.  Kåñëa
expressed His surprise with the word kutaù, “wherefrom.” Such impurities were
never expected from a person belonging to the civilized class of men known as
Äryans.  The  word  Äryan  is  applicable  to  persons  who  know  the  value  of  life
and  have  a  civilization  based  on  spiritual  realization.  Persons  who  are  led  by
the material conception of life do not know that the aim of life is realization of
the  Absolute  Truth,  Viñëu,  or  Bhagavän,  and  they  are  captivated  by  the
external features of the material world, and therefore they do not know what
liberation  is.  Persons  who  have  no  knowledge  of  liberation  from  material
bondage  are  called  non-Äryans.  Although  Arjuna  was  a  kñatriya,  he  was
deviating  from  his  prescribed  duties  by  declining  to  fight.  This  act  of
cowardice is described as befitting the non-Äryans. Such deviation from duty
does not help one in the progress of spiritual life, nor does it even give one the
opportunity to become famous in this world. Lord Kåñëa did not approve of the
so-called compassion of Arjuna for his kinsmen.

TEXT  3

©E-BYa& Maa SMa GaMa" PaaQaR NaETatvYYauPaPaÛTae )

+aud]& ôdYadaEbRLYa& TYa¤-aeitaï ParNTaPa )) 3 ))

klaibyaà mä sma gamaù pärtha
naitat tvayy upapadyate
kñudraà hådaya-daurbalyaà
tyaktvottiñöha parantapa

SYNONYMS

klaibyam—impotence; mä sma—do not; gamaù—take to; pärtha—O son of
Påthä; na—never; etat—this; tvayi—unto you; upadyate—is befitting;
kñudram—petty; hådaya—of the heart; daurbalyam—weakness;

tyaktvä—giving up; uttiñöha—get up; param-tapa—O chastiser of the enemies.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not become
you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy.

PURPORT

Arjuna was addressed as the son of Påthä, who happened to be the sister of
Kåñëa’s  father  Vasudeva.  Therefore  Arjuna  had  a  blood  relationship  with
Kåñëa. If the son of a kñatriya declines to fight, he is a kñatriya in name only,
and  if  the  son  of  a  brähmaëa  acts  impiously,  he  is  a  brähmaëa  in  name  only.
Such  kñatriyas  and  brähmaëas  are  unworthy  sons  of  their  fathers;  therefore,
Kåñëa did not want Arjuna to become an unworthy son of a kñatriya. Arjuna
was the most intimate friend of Kåñëa, and Kåñëa was directly guiding him on
the chariot; but in spite of all these credits, if Arjuna abandoned the battle he
would  be  committing  an  infamous  act.  Therefore  Kåñëa  said  that  such  an
attitude  in  Arjuna  did  not  fit  his  personality.  Arjuna  might  argue  that  he
would give up the battle on the grounds of his magnanimous attitude for the
most  respectable  Bhéñma  and  his  relatives,  but  Kåñëa  considered  that  sort  of
magnanimity  mere  weakness  of  heart.  Such  false  magnanimity  was  not
approved  by  any  authority.  Therefore,  such  magnanimity  or  so-called
nonviolence  should  be  given  up  by  persons  like  Arjuna  under  the  direct
guidance of Kåñëa.

TEXT  4

AJauRNa ovac

k-Qa& >aqZMaMah& Sa&:Yae d]ae<a& c MaDauSaUdNa )

wzui>a" Pa[iTaYaaeTSYaaiMa PaUJaahaRvirSaUdNa )) 4 ))

arjuna uväca

kathaà bhéñmam ahaà saìkhye
droëaà ca madhusüdana
iñubhiù pratiyotsyämi
püjärhäv ari-südana

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; katham—how; bhéñmam—Bhéñma; aham—I;
saìkhye—in the fight; droëam—Droëa; ca—also; madhu-südana—O killer of
Madhu; iñubhiù—with arrows; pratiyotsyämi—shall counterattack;
püjä-arhau—those who are worshipable; ari-südana—O killer of the enemies.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O killer of enemies, O killer of Madhu, how can I

counterattack with arrows in battle men like Bhéñma and Droëa, who are
worthy of my worship?

PURPORT

Respectable  superiors  like  Bhéñma  the  grandfather  and  Droëäcärya  the
teacher  are  always  worshipable.  Even  if  they  attack,  they  should  not  be
counterattacked.  It  is  general  etiquette  that  superiors  are  not  to  be  offered
even a verbal fight. Even if they are sometimes harsh in behavior, they should
not  be  harshly  treated.  Then,  how  is  it  possible  for  Arjuna  to  counterattack
them?  Would  Kåñëa  ever  attack  His  own  grandfather,  Ugrasena,  or  His
teacher,  Sändépani  Muni?  These  were  some  of  the  arguments  offered  by
Arjuna to Kåñëa.

TEXT  5

GauæNahTva ih MahaNau>aavaNa(

 é[eYaae >aae¢u-& >aE+YaMaPaqh l/aeke- )

hTvaQaRk-aMaa&STau GauæiNahEv

 >auÅqYa >aaeGaaNåiDarPa[idGDaaNa( )) 5 ))

gurün ahatvä hi mahänubhävän
çreyo bhoktuà bhaikñyam apéha loke
hatvärtha-kämäàs tu gurün ihaiva
bhuïjéya bhogän rudhira-pradigdhän

SYNONYMS

gurün—the superiors; ahatvä—not killing; hi—certainly;
mahä-anubhävän—great souls; çreyaù—it is better; bhoktum—to enjoy life;
bhaikñyam—by begging; api—even; iha—in this life; loke—in this world;
hatvä—killing; artha—gain; kämän—desiring; tu—but; gurün—superiors;
iha—in this world; eva—certainly; bhuïjéya—one has to enjoy;
bhogän—enjoyable things; rudhira—blood; pradigdhän—tainted with.

TRANSLATION

It would be better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of
the lives of great souls who are my teachers. Even though desiring worldly gain,
they are superiors. If they are killed, everything we enjoy will be tainted with
blood.

PURPORT

According  to  scriptural  codes,  a  teacher  who  engages  in  an  abominable
action and has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned. Bhéñma
and  Droëa  were  obliged  to  take  the  side  of  Duryodhana  because  of  his
financial  assistance,  although  they  should  not  have  accepted  such  a  position
simply  on  financial  considerations.  Under  the  circumstances,  they  have  lost
the respectability of teachers. But Arjuna thinks that nevertheless they remain
his superiors, and therefore to enjoy material profits after killing them would
mean to enjoy spoils tainted with blood.

TEXT  6

Na cETaiÜÚ" k-Taràae GarqYaae

 YaÜa JaYaeMa Yaid va Naae JaYaeYau" )

YaaNaev hTva Na iJaJaqivzaMa‚

 STae_viSQaTaa" Pa[Mau%e DaaTaRraí\a" )) 6 ))

na caitad vidmaù kataran no garéyo
yad vä jayema yadi vä no jayeyuù
yän eva hatvä na jijéviñämas
te ’vasthitäù pramukhe dhärtaräñöräù

SYNONYMS

na—nor; ca—also; etat—this; vidmaù—do we know; katarat—which;
naù—for us; garéyaù—better; yat vä—whether; jayema—we may conquer;
yadi—if; vä—or; naù—us; jayeyuù—they conquer; yän—those who;
eva—certainly; hatvä—by killing; na—never; jijéviñämaù—we would want to
live; te—all of them; avasthitäù—are situated; pramukhe—in the front;
dhärtaräñöräù—the sons of Dhåtaräñöra.

TRANSLATION

Nor do we know which is better—conquering them or being conquered by
them. If we killed the sons of Dhåtaräñöra, we should not care to live. Yet they
are now standing before us on the battlefield.

PURPORT

Arjuna  did  not  know  whether  he  should  fight  and  risk  unnecessary
violence,  although  fighting  is  the  duty  of  the  kñatriyas,  or  whether  he  should
refrain and live by begging. If he did not conquer the enemy, begging would be
his  only  means  of  subsistence.  Nor  was  there  certainty  of  victory,  because
either  side  might  emerge  victorious.  Even  if  victory  awaited  them  (and  their

cause was justified), still, if the sons of Dhåtaräñöra died in battle, it would be
very difficult to live in their absence. Under the circumstances, that would be
another kind of defeat for them. All these considerations by Arjuna definitely
proved that not only was he a great devotee of the Lord but he was also highly
enlightened and had complete control over his mind and senses. His desire to
live by begging, although he was born in the royal household, is another sign of
detachment. He was truly virtuous, as these qualities, combined with his faith
in  the  words  of  instruction  of  Çré  Kåñëa  (his  spiritual  master),  indicate.  It  is
concluded  that  Arjuna  was  quite  fit  for  liberation.  Unless  the  senses  are
controlled, there is no chance of elevation to the platform of knowledge, and
without knowledge and devotion there is no chance of liberation. Arjuna was
competent in all these attributes, over and above his enormous attributes in his
material relationships.

TEXT  7

k-aPaR<YadaezaePahTaSv>aav"

 Pa*C^aiMa Tva& DaMaRSaMMaU!ceTaa" )

YaC^\eYa" SYaaiàiêTa& b]Uih TaNMae

 iXaZYaSTae_h& XaaiDa Maa& Tva& Pa[PaàMa( )) 7 ))

kärpaëya-doñopahata-svabhävaù
påcchämi tväà dharma-sammüòha-cetäù
yac chreyaù syän niçcitaà brühi tan me
çiñyas te ’haà çädhi mäà tväà prapannam

SYNONYMS

kärpaëya—of miserliness; doña—by the weakness; upahata—being afflicted;
sva-bhävaù—characteristics; påcchämi—I am asking; tväm—unto You;
dharma—religion; sammüòha—bewildered; cetäù—in heart; yat—what;
çreyaù—all-good; syät—may be; niçcitam—confidently; brühi—tell; tat—that;
me—unto me; çiñyaù—disciple; te—Your; aham—I am; çädhi—just instruct;

mäm—me; tväm—unto You; prapannam—surrendered.

TRANSLATION

Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of
miserly weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me for certain what
is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You. Please
instruct me.

PURPORT

By nature’s own way the complete system of material activities is a source of
perplexity  for  everyone.  In  every  step  there  is  perplexity,  and  therefore  it
behooves one to approach a bona fide spiritual master who can give one proper
guidance  for  executing  the  purpose  of  life.  All  Vedic  literatures  advise  us  to
approach a bona fide spiritual master to get free from the perplexities of life,
which  happen  without  our  desire.  They  are  like  a  forest  fire  that  somehow
blazes without being set by anyone. Similarly, the world situation is such’ that
perplexities of life automatically appear, without our wanting such confusion.
No one wants fire, and yet it takes place, and we become perplexed. The Vedic
wisdom therefore advises that in order to solve the perplexities of life and to
understand  the  science  of  the  solution,  one  must  approach  a  spiritual  master
who is in the disciplic succession. A person with a bona fide spiritual master is
supposed  to  know  everything.  One  should  not,  therefore,  remain  in  material
perplexities but should approach a spiritual master. This is the purport of this
verse.

Who is the man in material perplexities? It is he who does not understand
the  problems  of  life.  In  the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad  (3.8.10)  the  perplexed
man is described as follows: yo vä etad akñaraà gärgy aviditväsmäû lokät praiti sa
kåpaëaù.  “He  is  a  miserly  man  who  does  not  solve  the  problems  of  life  as  a
human  and  who  thus  quits  this  world  like  the  cats  and  dogs,  without
understanding  the  science  of  self-realization.”  This  human  form  of  life  is  a
most  valuable  asset  for  the  living  entity  who  can  utilize  it  for  solving  the
problems of life; therefore, one who does not utilize this opportunity properly

is a miser. On the other hand, there is the brähmaëa, or he who is intelligent
enough  to  utilize  this  body  to  solve  all  the  problems  of  life.  Ya  etad  akñaraà
gärgi viditväsmäû lokät praiti sa brähmaëaù.

The  kåpaëas,  or  miserly  persons,  waste  their  time  in  being  overly
affectionate for family, society, country, etc., in the material conception of life.
One  is  often  attached  to  family  life,  namely  to  wife,  children  and  other
members,  on  the  basis  of  “skin  disease.”  The  kåpaëa  thinks  that  he  is  able  to
protect his family members from death; or the kåpaëa thinks that his family or
society can save him from the verge of death. Such family attachment can be
found  even  in  the  lower  animals,  who  take  care  of  children  also.  Being
intelligent, Arjuna could understand that his affection for family members and
his  wish  to  protect  them  from  death  were  the  causes  of  his  perplexities.
Although he could understand that his duty to fight was awaiting him, still, on
account of miserly weakness, he could not discharge the duties. He is therefore
asking  Lord  Kåñëa,  the  supreme  spiritual  master,  to  make  a  definite  solution.
He offers himself to Kåñëa as a disciple. He wants to stop friendly talks. Talks
between the master and the disciple are serious, and now Arjuna wants to talk
very  seriously  before  the  recognized  spiritual  master.  Kåñëa  is  therefore  the
original spiritual master of the science of Bhagavad-gétä, and Arjuna is the first
disciple 
the
Bhagavad-gétä  is  stated  in  the  Gétä  itself.  And  yet  foolish  mundane  scholars
explain  that  one  need  not  submit  to  Kåñëa  as  a  person,  but  to  “the  unborn
within  Kåñëa.”  There  is  no  difference  between  Kåñëa’s  within  and  without.
And one who has no sense of this understanding is the greatest fool in trying
to understand Bhagavad-gétä.

the  Gétä.  How  Arjuna  understands 

for  understanding 

TEXT  8

Na ih Pa[PaXYaaiMa MaMaaPaNauÛa‚

 ÛC^aek-MauC^aez<aiMaiNd]Yaa<aaMa( )

AvaPYa >aUMaavSaPaÒMa*Ö&

 raJYa& Saura<aaMaiPa caiDaPaTYaMa( )) 8 ))

na hi prapaçyämi mamäpanudyäd
yac chokam ucchoñaëam indriyäëäm
aväpya bhümäv asapatnam åddhaà
räjyaà suräëäm api cädhipatyam

SYNONYMS

na—do not; hi—certainly; prapaçyämi—I see; mama—my; apanudyät—can
drive away; yat—that which; çokam—lamentation; ucchoñaëam—drying up;
indriyäëäm—of the senses; aväpya—achieving; bhümau—on the earth;
asapatnam—without rival; åddham—prosperous; räjyam—kingdom;
suräëäm—of the demigods; api—even; ca—also; ädhipatyam—supremacy.

TRANSLATION

I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my senses. I

will not be able to dispel it even if I win a prosperous, unrivaled kingdom on
earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.

PURPORT

Although  Arjuna  was  putting  forward  so  many  arguments  based  on
knowledge of the principles of religion and moral codes, it appears that he was
unable to solve his real problem without the help of the spiritual master, Lord
Çré  Kåñëa.  He  could  understand  that  his  so-called  knowledge  was  useless  in
driving  away  his  problems,  which  were  drying  up  his  whole  existence;  and  it
was impossible for him to solve such perplexities without the help of a spiritual
master like Lord Kåñëa. Academic knowledge, scholarship, high position, etc.,
are  all  useless  in  solving  the  problems  of  life;  help  can  be  given  only  by  a
spiritual master like Kåñëa. Therefore, the conclusion is that a spiritual master
who is one hundred percent Kåñëa conscious is the bona fide spiritual master,
for he can solve the problems of life. Lord Caitanya said that one who is master

in  the  science  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  regardless  of  his  social  position,  is  the
real spiritual master.

kibä vipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra kene naya
yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä, sei ’guru’ haya

“It  does  not  matter  whether  a  person  is  a  vipra  [learned  scholar  in  Vedic
wisdom] or is born in a lower family, or is in the renounced order of life—if he
is  master  in  the  science  of  Kåñëa,  he  is  the  perfect  and  bona  fide  spiritual
master.” (Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 8.128) So without being a master in the
science of Kåñëa consciousness, no one is a bona fide spiritual master. It is also
said in Vedic literature:

ñaö-karma-nipuëo vipro
mantra-tantra-viçäradaù
avaiñëavo gurur na syäd
vaiñëavaù çva-paco guruù

“A scholarly brähmaëa, expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge, is unfit to
become a spiritual master without being a Vaiñëava, or expert in the science of
Kåñëa consciousness. But a person born in a family of a lower caste can become
a spiritual master if he is a Vaiñëava, or Kåñëa conscious.” (Padma Puräëa)

The  problems  of  material  existence—birth,  old  age,  disease  and
death—cannot  be  counteracted  by  accumulation  of  wealth  and  economic
development.  In  many  parts  of  the  world  there  are  states  which  are  replete
with all facilities of life, which are full of wealth and economically developed,
yet the problems of material existence are still present. They are seeking peace
in  different  ways,  but  they  can  achieve  real  happiness  only  if  they  consult
Kåñëa,  or  the  Bhagavad-gétä  and  Çrémad-Bhägavatam—which  constitute  the
science of Kåñëa—through the bona fide representative of Kåñëa, the man in
Kåñëa consciousness.

If  economic  development  and  material  comforts  could  drive  away  one’s
lamentations  for  family,  social,  national  or  international  inebrieties,  then
Arjuna  would  not  have  said  that  even  an  unrivaled  kingdom  on  earth  or
supremacy like that of the demigods in the heavenly planets would be unable

to  drive  away  his  lamentations.  He  sought,  therefore,  refuge  in  Kåñëa
consciousness,  and  that  is  the  right  path  for  peace  and  harmony.  Economic
development or supremacy over the world can be finished at any moment by
the  cataclysms  of  material  nature.  Even  elevation  into  a  higher  planetary
situation, as men are now seeking on the moon planet, can also be finished at
one stroke. The Bhagavad-gétä confirms this: kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti.
“When  the  results  of  pious  activities  are  finished,  one  falls  down  again  from
the  peak  of  happiness  to  the  lowest  status  of  life.”  Many  politicians  of  the
world  have  fallen  down  in  that  way.  Such  downfalls  only  constitute  more
causes for lamentation.

Therefore, if we want to curb lamentation for good, then we have to take
shelter of Kåñëa, as Arjuna is seeking to do. So Arjuna asked Kåñëa to solve his
problem definitely, and that is the way of Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  9

SaÅYa ovac

WvMau¤-a ôzqke-Xa& Gau@ake-Xa" ParNTaPa" )

Na YaaeTSYa wiTa GaaeivNdMau¤-a TaUZ<aq& b>aUv h )) 9 ))

saïjaya uväca
evam uktvä håñékeçaà
guòäkeçaù parantapaù
na yotsya iti govindam
uktvä tüñëéà babhüva ha

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; evam—thus; uktvä—speaking; håñékeçam—unto
Kåñëa, the master of the senses; guòäkeçaù—Arjuna, the master of curbing
ignorance; parantapaù—the chastiser of the enemies; na yotsye—I shall not
fight; iti—thus; govindam—unto Kåñëa, the giver of pleasure to the senses;
uktvä—saying; tüñëém—silent; babhüva—became; ha—certainly.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told Kåñëa,

“Govinda, I shall not fight,” and fell silent.

PURPORT

Dhåtaräñöra  must  have  been  very  glad  to  understand  that  Arjuna  was  not
going  to  fight  and  was  instead  leaving  the  battlefield  for  the  begging
profession.  But  Saïjaya  disappointed  him  again  in  relating  that  Arjuna  was
competent to kill his enemies (parantapaù). Although Arjuna was, for the time
being,  overwhelmed  with  false  grief  due  to  family  affection,  he  surrendered
unto Kåñëa, the supreme spiritual master, as a disciple. This indicated that he
would soon be free from the false lamentation resulting from family affection
and would be enlightened with perfect knowledge of self-realization, or Kåñëa
consciousness,  and  would  then  surely  fight.  Thus  Dhåtaräñöra’s  joy  would  be
frustrated, since Arjuna would be enlightened by Kåñëa and would fight to the
end.

TEXT  10

TaMauvac ôzqke-Xa" Pa[hSaiàv >aarTa

SaeNaYaaeå>aYaaeMaRDYae ivzqdNTaiMad& vc" )) 10 ))

tam uväca håñékeçaù
prahasann iva bhärata
senayor ubhayor madhye
viñédantam idaà vacaù

SYNONYMS

tam—unto him; uväca—said; håñékeçaù—the master of the senses, Kåñëa;
prahasan—smiling; iva—like that; bhärata—O Dhåtaräñöra, descendant of

Bharata; senayoù—of the armies; ubhayoù—of both parties; madhye—between;
viñédantam—unto the lamenting one; idam—the following; vacaù—words.

TRANSLATION

O descendant of Bharata, at that time Kåñëa, smiling, in the midst of both

the armies, spoke the following words to the grief-stricken Arjuna.

PURPORT

The talk was going on between intimate friends, namely the Håñékeça and
the  Guòäkeça.  As  friends,  both  of  them  were  on  the  same  level,  but  one  of
them voluntarily became a student of  the other. Kåñëa was smiling because a
friend  had  chosen  to  become  a  disciple.  As  Lord  of  all,  He  is  always  in  the
superior  position  as  the  master  of  everyone,  and  yet  the  Lord  agrees  to  be  a
friend, a son, or a lover for a devotee who wants Him in such a role. But when
He  was  accepted  as  the  master, He at once assumed the role and talked with
the disciple like the master—with gravity, as it is required. It appears that the
talk  between  the  master  and  the  disciple  was  openly  exchanged  in  the
presence  of  both  armies  so  that  all  were  benefitted.  So  the  talks  of
Bhagavad-gétä  are  not  for  any  particular  person,  society,  or  community,  but
they are for all, and friends or enemies are equally entitled to hear them.

TEXT  11

é[q>aGavaNauvac

AXaaeCYaaNaNvXaaecSTv& Pa[javada&ê >aazSae )

GaTaaSaUNaGaTaaSaU&ê NaaNauXaaeciNTa Pai<@Taa" )) 11 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
açocyän anvaçocas tvaà
prajïä-vädäàç ca bhäñase
gatäsün agatäsüàç ca

nänuçocanti paëòitäù

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; açocyän—not
worthy of lamentation; anvaçocaù—you are lamenting; tvam—you;
prajïä-vädän—learned talks; ca—also; bhäñase—speaking; gata—lost;
asün—life; agata—not past; asün—life; ca—also; na—never;
anuçocanti—lament; paëòitäù—the learned.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: While speaking learned words,
you are mourning for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament
neither for the living nor for the dead.

PURPORT

The  Lord  at  once  took  the  position  of  the  teacher  and  chastised  the
student,  calling  him,  indirectly,  a  fool. The Lord said, “You are talking like a
learned man, but you do not know that one who is learned—one who knows
what  is  body  and  what  is  soul—does  not  lament  for  any  stage  of  the  body,
neither  in  the  living  nor  in  the  dead  condition.”  As  explained  in  later
chapters, it will be clear that knowledge means to know matter and spirit and
the controller of both. Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given
more  importance  than  politics  or  sociology,  but  he  did  not  know  that
knowledge  of  matter,  soul  and  the  Supreme  is  even  more  important  than
religious formularies. And because he was lacking in that knowledge, he should
not  have  posed  himself  as  a very learned man. As he did not happen to be a
very  learned  man,  he  was  consequently  lamenting  for  something  which  was
unworthy of lamentation. The body is born and is destined to be vanquished
today or tomorrow; therefore the body is not as important as the soul. One who
knows this is actually learned, and for him there is no cause for lamentation,
regardless of the condition of the material body.

TEXT  12

NaTvevah& JaaTau NaaSa& Na Tv& NaeMae JaNaaiDaPaa" )

Na cEv Na>aivZYaaMa" SaveR vYaMaTa" ParMa( )) 12 ))

na tv evähaà jätu näsaà
na tvaà neme janädhipäù
na caiva na bhaviñyämaù
sarve vayam ataù param

SYNONYMS

na—never; tu—but; eva—certainly; aham—I; jätu—at any time; na—did not;
äsam—exist; na—not; tvam—you; na—not; ime—all these;
jana-adhipäù—kings; na—never; ca—also; eva—certainly; na—not;
bhaviñyämaù—shall exist; sarve vayam—all of us; ataù param—hereafter.

TRANSLATION

Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings;

nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.

PURPORT

In the Vedas, in the Kaöha Upaniñad as well as in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad,
it  is  said  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  maintainer  of
innumerable living entities, in terms of their different situations according to
individual work and reaction of work. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is
also,  by  His  plenary  portions,  alive  in  the  heart  of  every  living  entity.  Only
saintly persons who can see, within and without, the same Supreme Lord can
actually attain to perfect and eternal peace.

nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm
eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän

tam ätma-sthaà ye ’nupaçyanti dhéräs
teñäà çäntiù çäçvaté netareñäm

The same Vedic truth given to Arjuna is given to all persons in the world
who  pose  themselves  as  very  learned  but  factually  have  but  a  poor  fund  of
knowledge.  The  Lord  says  clearly  that  He  Himself,  Arjuna  and  all  the  kings
who  are  assembled  on  the  battlefield are eternally individual beings and that
the  Lord  is  eternally  the  maintainer  of  the  individual  living  entities  both  in
their conditioned and in their liberated situations. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead  is  the  supreme  individual  person,  and  Arjuna,  the  Lord’s  eternal
associate, and all the kings assembled there are individual eternal persons. It is
not that they did not exist as individuals in the past, and it is not that they will
not  remain  eternal  persons.  Their individuality existed in the past, and their
individuality  will  continue  in  the  future  without  interruption.  Therefore,
there is no cause for lamentation for anyone.

The Mäyävädé theory that after liberation the individual soul, separated by
the covering of mäyä, or illusion, will merge into the impersonal Brahman and
lose  its  individual  existence  is  not  supported  herein  by  Lord  Kåñëa,  the
supreme authority. Nor is the theory that we only think of individuality in the
conditioned  state  supported  herein.  Kåñëa  clearly  says  herein  that  in  the
future  also  the  individuality  of  the  Lord and others, as it is confirmed in the
Upaniñads,  will  continue  eternally.  This  statement  of  Kåñëa’s  is  authoritative
because  Kåñëa  cannot  be  subject  to  illusion.  If  individuality  were  not  a  fact,
then  Kåñëa  would  not  have  stressed  it  so  much—even  for  the  future.  The
Mäyävädé may argue that the individuality spoken of by Kåñëa is not spiritual,
but  material.  Even  accepting  the  argument  that  the  individuality  is  material,
then  how  can  one  distinguish  Kåñëa’s  individuality?  Kåñëa  affirms  His
individuality in the past and confirms His individuality in the future also. He
has  confirmed  His  individuality  in  many  ways,  and  impersonal  Brahman  has
been  declared  to  be  subordinate  to  Him.  Kåñëa  has  maintained  spiritual
individuality  all  along;  if  He  is  accepted  as  an  ordinary  conditioned  soul  in
individual consciousness, then His Bhagavad-gétä has no value as authoritative
scripture. A common man with all the four defects of human frailty is unable
to  teach  that  which  is  worth  hearing.  The  Gétä  is  above  such  literature.  No

mundane book compares with the Bhagavad-gétä. When one accepts Kåñëa as
an ordinary man, the Gétä loses all importance. The Mäyävädé argues that the
plurality mentioned in this verse is conventional and that it refers to the body.
But  previous  to  this  verse  such  a  bodily  conception  is  already  condemned.
After  condemning  the  bodily  conception  of  the  living  entities,  how  was  it
possible  for  Kåñëa  to  place  a  conventional  proposition  on  the  body  again?
Therefore,  individuality  is  maintained  on  spiritual  grounds  and  is  thus
confirmed  by  great  äcäryas  like  Çré  Rämänuja  and  others.  It  is  clearly
mentioned  in  many  places  in  the  Gétä  that  this  spiritual  individuality  is
understood by those who are devotees of the Lord. Those who are envious of
Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no bona fide access to the
great  literature.  The  nondevotee’s  approach  to  the  teachings  of  the  Gétä  is
something like that of a bee licking on a bottle of honey. One cannot have a
taste  of  honey  unless  one  opens  the  bottle.  Similarly,  the  mysticism  of  the
Bhagavad-gétä can be understood only by devotees, and no one else can taste it,
as it is stated in the Fourth Chapter of the book. Nor can the Gétä be touched
by persons who envy the very existence of the Lord. Therefore, the Mäyävädé
explanation of the Gétä is a most misleading presentation of the whole truth.
Lord Caitanya has forbidden us to read commentations made by the Mäyävädés
and  warns  that  one  who  takes  to  such  an  understanding  of  the  Mäyävädé
philosophy  loses  all  power  to  understand  the  real  mystery  of  the  Gétä.  If
individuality refers to the empirical universe, then there is no need of teaching
by the Lord. The plurality of the individual soul and of the Lord is an eternal
fact, and it is confirmed by the Vedas as above mentioned.

TEXT  13

deihNaae_iSMaNYaQaa dehe k-aEMaar& YaaEvNa& Jara )

TaQaa dehaNTarPa[aiáDasrSTa}a Na MauùiTa )) 13 ))

dehino ’smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir

dhéras tatra na muhyati

SYNONYMS

dehinaù—of the embodied; asmin—in this; yathä—as; dehe—in the body;
kaumäram—boyhood; yauvanam—youth; jarä—old age; tathä—similarly;
deha-antara—of transference of the body; präptiù—achievement; dhéraù—the
sober; tatra—thereupon; na—never; muhyati—is deluded.

TRANSLATION

As the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. A sober
person is not bewildered by such a change.

PURPORT

Since  every  living  entity  is  an  individual  soul,  each  is  changing  his  body
every  moment,  manifesting  sometimes  as  a  child,  sometimes  as  a  youth,  and
sometimes  as  an  old  man.  Yet  the  same  spirit  soul  is  there  and  does  not
undergo  any  change.  This  individual  soul  finally  changes  the  body  at  death
and transmigrates to another body; and since it is sure to have another body in
the  next  birth—either  material  or  spiritual—there  was  no  cause  for
lamentation by Arjuna on account of death, neither for Bhéñma nor for Droëa,
for  whom  he  was  so  much  concerned.  Rather,  he  should  rejoice  for  their
changing bodies from old to new ones, thereby rejuvenating their energy. Such
changes of body account for varieties of enjoyment or suffering, according to
one’s work in life. So Bhéñma and Droëa, being noble souls, were surely going
to have spiritual bodies in the next life, or at least life in heavenly bodies for
superior enjoyment of material existence. So, in either case, there was no cause
of lamentation.

Any man who has perfect knowledge of the constitution of the individual
soul, the Supersoul, and nature—both material and spiritual—is called a dhéra,
or a most sober man. Such a man is never deluded by the change of bodies.

The Mäyävädé theory of oneness of the spirit soul cannot be entertained, on
the  ground  that  the  spirit  soul  cannot  be  cut  into  pieces  as  a  fragmental
portion. Such cutting into different individual souls would make the Supreme
cleavable  or  changeable,  against  the  principle  of  the  Supreme  Soul’s  being
unchangeable.  As  confirmed  in  the  Gétä,  the  fragmental  portions  of  the
Supreme  exist  eternally  (sanätana)  and  are  called  kñara;  that  is,  they  have  a
tendency  to  fall  down  into  material  nature.  These  fragmental  portions  are
eternally  so,  and  even  after  liberation  the  individual  soul  remains  the
same—fragmental.  But  once  liberated,  he  lives  an  eternal  life  in  bliss  and
knowledge  with  the  Personality  of  Godhead.  The  theory  of  reflection  can  be
applied to the Supersoul, who is present in each and every individual body and
is known as the Paramätmä. He is different from the individual living entity.
When the sky is reflected in water, the reflections represent both the sun and
the moon and the stars also. The stars can be compared to the living entities
and  the  sun  or  the  moon  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  individual  fragmental
spirit soul is represented by Arjuna, and the Supreme Soul is the Personality of
Godhead Çré Kåñëa. They are not on the same level, as it will be apparent in
the  beginning  of  the  Fourth  Chapter.  If  Arjuna  is  on  the  same  level  with
Kåñëa,  and  Kåñëa  is  not  superior  to  Arjuna,  then  their  relationship  of
instructor and instructed becomes meaningless. If both of them are deluded by
the illusory energy (mäyä), then there is no need of one being the instructor
and the other the instructed. Such instruction would be useless because, in the
clutches  of  mäyä,  no  one  can  be  an  authoritative  instructor.  Under  the
circumstances, it is admitted that Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, superior in
position to the living entity, Arjuna, who is a forgetful soul deluded by mäyä.

TEXT  14

Maa}aaSPaXaaRSTau k-aENTaeYa XaqTaaeZ<aSau%du"%da" )

AaGaMaaPaaiYaNaae_iNaTYaaSTaa&iSTaiTa+aSv >aarTa )) 14 ))

mäträ-sparçäs tu kaunteya
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkha-däù

ägamäpäyino ’nityäs
täàs titikñasva bhärata

SYNONYMS

mäträ-sparçäù—sensory perception; tu—only; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
çéta—winter; uñëa—summer; sukha—happiness; duùkha—and pain;
däù—giving; ägama—appearing; apäyinaù—disappearing;
anityäù—nonpermanent; tän—all of them; titikñasva—just try to tolerate;
bhärata—O descendant of the Bharata dynasty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunté, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and
their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of
winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of
Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed.

PURPORT

In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate nonpermanent
appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress. According to Vedic
injunction,  one  has  to  take  his  bath  early  in  the  morning  even  during  the
month of Mägha (January-February). It is very cold at that time, but in spite of
that a man who abides by the religious principles does not hesitate to take his
bath.  Similarly,  a  woman  does  not  hesitate  to  cook  in  the  kitchen  in  the
months  of  May  and  June,  the  hottest  part  of  the  summer  season.  One  has  to
execute his duty in spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is the
religious  principle  of  the  kñatriyas,  and  although  one  has  to  fight  with  some
friend or relative, one should not deviate from his prescribed duty. One has to
follow  the  prescribed  rules  and  regulations  of  religious  principles  in  order  to
rise up to the platform of knowledge, because by knowledge and devotion only
can one liberate himself from the clutches of mäyä (illusion).

The two different names of address given to Arjuna are also significant. To

address  him  as  Kaunteya  signifies  his  great  blood  relations  from  his  mother’s
side; and to address him as Bhärata signifies his greatness from his father’s side.
From both sides he is supposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage brings
responsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore, he cannot
avoid fighting.

TEXT  15

Ya& ih Na VYaQaYaNTYaeTae Pauåz& PauåzzR>a )

SaMadu"%Sau%& Daqr& Saae_Ma*TaTvaYa k-LPaTae )) 15 ))

yaà hi na vyathayanty ete
puruñaà puruñarñabha
sama-duùkha-sukhaà dhéraà
so ’måtatväya kalpate

SYNONYMS

yam—one to whom; hi—certainly; na—never; vyathayanti—are distressing;
ete—all these; puruñam—to a person; puruña-åñabha—O best among men;
sama—unaltered; duùkha—in distress; sukham—and happiness;
dhéram—patient; saù—he; amåtatväya—for liberation; kalpate—is considered
eligible.

TRANSLATION

O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness

and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation.

PURPORT

Anyone  who  is  steady  in  his  determination  for  the  advanced  stage  of
spiritual  realization  and  can  equally  tolerate  the  onslaughts  of  distress  and
happiness  is  certainly  a  person  eligible  for  liberation.  In  the  varëäçrama

institution, the fourth stage of life, namely the renounced order (sannyäsa), is
a  painstaking  situation.  But  one  who  is  serious  about  making  his  life  perfect
surely  adopts  the  sannyäsa  order  of  life  in  spite  of  all  difficulties.  The
difficulties  usually  arise  from  having  to  sever  family  relationships,  to  give  up
the  connection  of  wife  and  children.  But  if  anyone  is  able  to  tolerate  such
difficulties,  surely  his  path  to  spiritual  realization  is  complete.  Similarly,  in
Arjuna’s discharge of duties as a kñatriya, he is advised to persevere, even if it
is difficult to fight with his family members or similarly beloved persons. Lord
Caitanya took sannyäsa at the age of twenty-four, and His dependents, young
wife as well as old mother, had no one else to look after them. Yet for a higher
cause He took sannyäsa and was steady in the discharge of higher duties. That
is the way of achieving liberation from material bondage.

TEXT  16

NaaSaTaae ivÛTae >aavae Naa>aavae ivÛTae SaTa" )

o>aYaaeriPa d*íae_NTaSTvNaYaaeSTatvdiXaRi>a" )) 16 ))

näsato vidyate bhävo
näbhävo vidyate sataù
ubhayor api dåñöo ’ntas
tv anayos tattva-darçibhiù

SYNONYMS

na—never; asataù—of the nonexistent; vidyate—there is;
bhävaù—endurance; na—never; abhävaù—changing quality; vidyate—there is;
sataù—of the eternal; ubhayoù—of the two; api—verily; dåñöaù—observed;
antaù—conclusion; tu—indeed; anayoù—of them; tattva—of the truth;
darçibhiù—by the seers.

TRANSLATION

Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent [the

material body] there is no endurance and of the eternal [the soul] there is no
change. This they have concluded by studying the nature of both.

PURPORT

There  is  no  endurance  of  the  changing  body.  That  the  body  is  changing
every moment by the actions and reactions of the different cells is admitted by
modern medical science; and thus growth and old age are taking place in the
body.  But  the  spirit  soul  exists  permanently,  remaining  the  same  despite  all
changes of the body and the mind. That is the difference between matter and
spirit.  By  nature,  the  body  is  ever  changing,  and  the  soul  is  eternal.  This
conclusion is established by all classes of seers of the truth, both impersonalist
and personalist. In the Viñëu Puräëa (2.12.38) it is stated that Viñëu and His
abodes  all  have  self-illuminated  spiritual  existence  (jyotéàñi  viñëur  bhuvanäni
viñëuù).  The  words  existent  and  nonexistent  refer  only  to  spirit  and  matter.
That is the version of all seers of truth.

This  is  the  beginning  of  the  instruction  by  the  Lord  to  the  living  entities
who  are  bewildered  by  the  influence  of  ignorance.  Removal  of  ignorance
involves the reestablishment of the eternal relationship between the worshiper
and  the  worshipable  and  the  consequent  understanding  of  the  difference
between  the  part-and-parcel  living  entities  and  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead. One can understand the nature of the Supreme by thorough study
of oneself, the difference between oneself and the Supreme being understood
as the relationship between the part and the whole. In the Vedänta-sütras, as
well  as  in  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  the  Supreme  has  been  accepted  as  the
origin  of  all  emanations.  Such  emanations  are  experienced  by  superior  and
inferior natural sequences. The living entities belong to the superior nature, as
it  will  be  revealed  in  the  Seventh  Chapter.  Although  there  is  no  difference
between  the  energy  and  the  energetic,  the  energetic  is  accepted  as  the
Supreme,  and  energy  or  nature  is  accepted  as  the  subordinate.  The  living
entities, therefore, are always subordinate to the Supreme Lord, as in the case
of  the  master  and  the  servant,  or  the  teacher  and  the  taught.  Such  clear
knowledge  is  impossible  to  understand  under  the  spell  of  ignorance,  and  to

drive  away  such  ignorance  the  Lord  teaches  the  Bhagavad-gétä  for  the
enlightenment of all living entities for all time.

TEXT  17

AivNaaiXa Tau TaiÜiÖ YaeNa SavRiMad& TaTaMa( )

ivNaaXaMaVYaYaSYaaSYa Na k-iêTk-TauRMahRiTa )) 17 ))

avinäçi tu tad viddhi
yena sarvam idaà tatam
vinäçam avyayasyäsya
na kaçcit kartum arhati

SYNONYMS

avinäçi—imperishable; tu—but; tat—that; viddhi—know it; yena—by whom;
sarvam—all of the body; idam—this; tatam—pervaded; vinäçam—destruction;
avyayasya—of the imperishable; asya—of it; na kaçcit—no one; kartum—to
do; arhati—is able.

TRANSLATION

That which pervades the entire body you should know to be indestructible.

No one is able to destroy that imperishable soul.

PURPORT

This verse more clearly explains the real nature of the soul, which is spread
all over the body. Anyone can understand what is spread all over the body: it is
consciousness. Everyone is conscious of the pains and pleasures of the body in
part or as a whole. This spreading of consciousness is limited within one’s own
body. The pains and pleasures of one body are unknown to another. Therefore,
each and every body is the embodiment of an individual soul, and the symptom
of  the  soul’s  presence  is  perceived  as  individual  consciousness.  This  soul  is

described as one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hair point in
size. The Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (5.9) confirms this:

bälägra-çata-bhägasya
çatadhä kalpitasya ca
bhägo jévaù vijïeyaù
sa cänantyäya kalpate

“When  the  upper  point  of  a  hair  is  divided  into  one  hundred  parts  and
again each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts, each such
part is the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul.” Similarly the same
version is stated:

keçägra-çata-bhägasya
çatäàçaù sädåçätmakaù
jévaù sükñma-svarüpo ’yaà
saìkhyätéto hi cit-kaëaù
 [Cc. Madya 19.140]

“There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured as

one ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair.”

Therefore,  the  individual  particle  of  spirit  soul  is  a  spiritual  atom  smaller
than  the  material  atoms,  and  such  atoms  are  innumerable.  This  very  small
spiritual spark is the basic principle of the material body, and the influence of
such a spiritual spark is spread all over the body as the influence of the active
principle  of  some  medicine  spreads  throughout  the  body.  This  current  of  the
spirit soul is felt all over the body as consciousness, and that is the proof of the
presence of the soul. Any layman can understand that the material body minus
consciousness is a dead body, and this consciousness cannot be revived in the
body by any means of material administration. Therefore, consciousness is not
due  to  any  amount  of  material  combination,  but  to  the  spirit  soul.  In  the
Muëòaka Upaniñad (3.1.9) the measurement of the atomic spirit soul is further
explained:

eño ’ëur ätmä cetasä veditavyo
yasmin präëaù païcadhä saàviveça

präëaiç cittaà sarvam otaà prajänäà
yasmin viçuddhe vibhavaty eña ätmä

“The  soul  is  atomic  in  size  and  can  be  perceived  by  perfect  intelligence.
This  atomic  soul  is  floating  in  the  five  kinds  of  air  (präëa,  apäna,  vyäna,
samäna and udäna), is situated within the heart, and spreads its influence all
over the body of the embodied living entities. When the soul is purified from
the  contamination  of  the  five  kinds  of  material  air,  its  spiritual  influence  is
exhibited.”

The  haöha-yoga  system  is  meant  for  controlling  the  five  kinds  of  air
encircling  the  pure  soul  by  different  kinds  of  sitting  postures—not  for  any
material profit, but for liberation of the minute soul from the entanglement of
the material atmosphere.

So  the  constitution  of  the  atomic  soul  is  admitted  in  all  Vedic  literatures,
and  it  is  also  actually  felt  in  the  practical  experience  of  any  sane  man.  Only
the insane man can think of this atomic soul as all-pervading viñëu-tattva.

The  influence  of  the  atomic  soul  can  be  spread  all  over  a  particular  body.
According to the Muëòaka Upaniñad, this atomic soul is situated in the heart
of  every  living  entity,  and  because  the  measurement  of  the  atomic  soul  is
beyond  the  power  of  appreciation  of  the  material  scientists,  some  of  them
assert  foolishly  that  there  is  no  soul.  The  individual  atomic  soul  is  definitely
there in the heart along with the Supersoul, and thus all the energies of bodily
movement  are  emanating  from  this  part  of  the  body.  The  corpuscles  which
carry  the  oxygen  from  the  lungs  gather  energy  from  the  soul. When  the  soul
passes  away  from  this  position,  the  activity  of  the  blood,  generating  fusion,
ceases.  Medical  science  accepts  the  importance  of  the  red  corpuscles,  but  it
cannot  ascertain  that  the  source  of  the  energy  is  the  soul.  Medical  science,
however, does admit that the heart is the seat of all energies of the body.

Such  atomic  particles  of  the  spirit  whole  are  compared  to  the  sunshine
molecules. In the sunshine there are innumerable radiant molecules. Similarly,
the fragmental parts of the Supreme Lord are atomic sparks of the rays of the
Supreme Lord, called by the name prabhä, or superior energy. So whether one
follows Vedic knowledge or modern science, one cannot deny the existence of
the spirit soul in the body, and the science of the soul is explicitly described in

the Bhagavad-gétä by the Personality of Godhead Himself.

TEXT  18

ANTavNTa wMae deha iNaTYaSYaae¢-a" Xarqir<a" )

ANaaiXaNaae_Pa[MaeYaSYa TaSMaaÛuDYaSv >aarTa )) 18 ))

antavanta ime dehä
nityasyoktäù çarériëaù
anäçino ’prameyasya
tasmäd yudhyasva bhärata

SYNONYMS

anta-vantaù—perishable; ime—all these; dehäù—material bodies;
nityasya—eternal in existence; uktäù—are said; çarériëaù—of the embodied
soul; anäçinaù—never to be destroyed; aprameyasya—immeasurable;
tasmät—therefore; yudhyasva—fight; bhärata—O descendant of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

The material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal living
entity is sure to come to an end; therefore, fight, O descendant of Bharata.

PURPORT

The material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately, or it
may  do  so  after  a  hundred  years.  It  is  a  question  of  time  only.  There  is  no
chance  of  maintaining  it  indefinitely.  But  the  spirit  soul  is  so  minute  that  it
cannot  even  be  seen  by  an  enemy,  to  say  nothing  of  being  killed.  As
mentioned in the previous verse, it is so small that no one can have any idea
how  to  measure  its  dimension.  So  from  both  viewpoints  there  is  no  cause  of
lamentation,  because  the  living  entity  as  he  is  cannot  be  killed  nor  can  the
material body be saved for any length of time or permanently protected. The

minute particle of the whole spirit acquires this material body according to his
work, and therefore observance of religious principles should be utilized. In the
Vedänta-sütras  the  living  entity  is  qualified  as  light  because  he  is  part  and
parcel of the supreme light. As sunlight maintains the entire universe, so the
light of the soul maintains this material body. As soon as the spirit soul is out
of  this  material  body,  the  body  begins  to  decompose;  therefore  it  is  the  spirit
soul  which  maintains  this  body.  The  body  itself  is  unimportant.  Arjuna  was
advised  to  fight  and  not  sacrifice  the  cause  of  religion  for  material,  bodily
considerations.

TEXT  19

Ya WNa& veita hNTaar& YaêENa& MaNYaTae hTaMa( )

o>aaE TaaE Na ivJaaNaqTaae NaaYa& hiNTa Na hNYaTae )) 19 ))

ya enaà vetti hantäraà
yaç cainaà manyate hatam
ubhau tau na vijänéto
näyaà hanti na hanyate

SYNONYMS

yaù—anyone who; enam—this; vetti—knows; hantäram—the killer;
yaù—anyone who; ca—also; enam—this; manyate—thinks; hatam—killed;
ubhau—both; tau—they; na—never; vijänétaù—are in knowledge; na—never;
ayam—this; hanti—kills; na—nor; hanyate—is killed.

TRANSLATION

Neither he who thinks the living entity the slayer nor he who thinks it slain

is in knowledge, for the self slays not nor is slain.

PURPORT

When an embodied living entity is hurt by fatal weapons, it is to be known
that the living entity within the body is not killed. The spirit soul is so small
that it is impossible to kill him by any material weapon, as will be evident from
subsequent  verses.  Nor  is  the  living  entity  killable,  because  of  his  spiritual
constitution. What is killed, or is supposed to be killed, is the body only. This,
however, does not at all encourage killing of the body. The Vedic injunction is
mä  hiàsyät  sarvä  bhütäni:  never  commit  violence  to  anyone.  Nor  does
understanding that the living entity is not killed encourage animal slaughter.
Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominable and is punishable
by the law of the state as well as by the law of the Lord. Arjuna, however, is
being engaged in killing for the principle of religion, and not whimsically.

TEXT  20

Na JaaYaTae iMa]YaTae va k-daic‚

 àaYa& >aUTva >aivTaa va Na >aUYa" )

AJaae iNaTYa" XaaìTaae_Ya& Paura<aae

 Na hNYaTae hNYaMaaNae Xarqre )) 20 ))

na jäyate mriyate vä kadäcin
näyaà bhütvä bhavitä vä na bhüyaù
ajo nityaù çäçvato ’yaà puräëo
na hanyate hanyamäne çarére

SYNONYMS

na—never; jäyate—takes birth; mriyate—dies; vä—either; kadäcit—at any
time (past, present or future); na—never; ayam—this; bhütvä—having come
into being; bhavitä—will come to be; vä—or; na—not; bhüyaù—or is again
coming to be; ajaù—unborn; nityaù—eternal; çäçvataù—permanent;
ayam—this; puräëaù—the oldest; na—never; hanyate—is killed;
hanyamäne—being killed; çarére—the body.

TRANSLATION

For the soul there is neither birth nor death at any time. He has not come

into being, does not come into being, and will not come into being. He is
unborn, eternal, ever-existing and primeval. He is not slain when the body is
slain.

PURPORT

Qualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit is one
with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body. Sometimes the soul
is  called  the  steady,  or  küöa-stha.  The  body  is  subject  to  six  kinds  of
transformations. It takes its birth from the womb of the mother’s body, remains
for  some  time,  grows,  produces  some  effects,  gradually  dwindles,  and  at  last
vanishes into oblivion. The soul, however, does not go through such changes.
The soul is not born, but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes
its  birth.  The  soul  does  not  take  birth  there,  and  the  soul  does  not  die.
Anything which has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth,
he  therefore  has  no  past,  present  or  future.  He  is  eternal,  ever-existing,  and
primeval—that is, there is no trace in history of his coming into being. Under
the impression of the body, we seek the history of birth, etc., of the soul. The
soul does not at any time become old, as the body does. The so-called old man,
therefore,  feels  himself  to  be  in  the  same  spirit  as  in  his  childhood  or  youth.
The changes of the body do not affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate
like  a  tree,  nor  anything  material.  The  soul  has  no  by-product  either.  The
by-products  of  the  body,  namely  children,  are  also  different  individual  souls;
and, owing to the body, they appear as children of a particular man. The body
develops because of the soul’s presence, but the soul has neither offshoots nor
change. Therefore, the soul is free from the six changes of the body.

In the Kaöha Upaniñad (1.2.18) we also find a similar passage, which reads:

na jäyate mriyate vä vipaçcin
näyaà kutaçcin na babhüva kaçcit

ajo nityaù çäçvato ’yaà puräëo
na hanyate hanyamäne çarére
 [Bg. 2.20]

The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-gétä,
but here in this verse there is one special word, vipaçcit, which means learned
or with knowledge.

The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness. Therefore,
consciousness  is  the  symptom  of  the  soul.  Even  if  one  does  not  find  the  soul
within the heart, where he is situated, one can still understand the presence of
the soul simply by the presence of consciousness. Sometimes we do not find the
sun in the sky owing to clouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the
sun is always there, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon
as there is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we can understand that
the  sun  is  in  the  sky.  Similarly,  since  there  is  some  consciousness  in  all
bodies—whether man or animal—we can understand the presence of the soul.
This consciousness of the soul is, however, different from the consciousness of
the  Supreme  because  the  supreme  consciousness  is  all-knowledge—past,
present  and  future.  The  consciousness  of  the  individual  soul  is  prone  to  be
forgetful.  When  he  is  forgetful  of  his  real  nature,  he  obtains  education  and
enlightenment  from  the  superior  lessons  of  Kåñëa.  But  Kåñëa  is  not  like  the
forgetful soul. If so, Kåñëa’s teachings of Bhagavad-gétä would be useless.

There are two kinds of souls—namely the minute particle soul (aëu-ätmä)
and the Supersoul (vibhu-ätmä). This is also confirmed in the Kaöha Upaniñad
(1.2.20) in this way:

aëor aëéyän mahato mahéyän
ätmäsya jantor nihito guhäyäm
tam akratuù paçyati véta-çoko
dhätuù prasädän mahimänam ätmanaù

“Both the Supersoul [Paramätmä] and the atomic soul [jévätmä] are situated
on  the  same  tree  of  the  body  within  the  same  heart  of  the  living  being,  and
only one who has become free from all material desires as well as lamentations
can, by the grace of the Supreme, understand the glories of the soul.” Kåñëa is

the fountainhead of the Supersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following
chapters, and Arjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore
he requires to be enlightened by Kåñëa, or by His bona fide representative (the
spiritual master).

TEXT  21

vedaivNaaiXaNa& iNaTYa& Ya WNaMaJaMaVYaYaMa( )

k-Qa& Sa Pauåz" PaaQaR k&- gaaTaYaiTa hiNTa k-Ma( )) 21 ))

vedävinäçinaà nityaà
ya enam ajam avyayam
kathaà sa puruñaù pärtha
kaà ghätayati hanti kam

SYNONYMS

veda—knows; avinäçinam—indestructible; nityam—always existing; yaù—one
who; enam—this (soul); ajam—unborn; avyayam—immutable; katham—how;
saù—that; puruñaù—person; pärtha—O Pärtha (Arjuna); kam—whom;
ghätayati—causes to hurt; hanti—kills; kam—whom.

TRANSLATION

O Pärtha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible,

eternal, unborn and immutable kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?

PURPORT

Everything  has  its  proper  utility,  and  a  man  who  is  situated  in  complete
knowledge  knows  how  and  where  to  apply  a  thing  for  its  proper  utility.
Similarly, violence also has its utility, and how to apply violence rests with the
person  in  knowledge.  Although  the  justice  of  the  peace  awards  capital
punishment  to  a  person  condemned  for  murder,  the  justice  of  the  peace

cannot be blamed, because he orders violence to another person according to
the codes of justice. In Manu-saàhitä, the lawbook for mankind, it is supported
that a murderer should be condemned to death so that in his next life he will
not  have  to  suffer  for  the  great  sin  he  has  committed.  Therefore,  the  king’s
punishment  of  hanging  a  murderer  is  actually  beneficial.  Similarly,  when
Kåñëa  orders  fighting,  it  must  be  concluded  that  violence  is  for  supreme
justice, and thus Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well that such
violence,  committed  in  the  act  of  fighting  for  Kåñëa,  is  not  violence  at  all
because,  at  any  rate,  the  man,  or  rather  the  soul,  cannot  be  killed;  so  for  the
administration of justice, so-called violence is permitted. A surgical operation
is not meant to kill the patient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be
executed by Arjuna at the instruction of Kåñëa is with full knowledge, so there
is no possibility of sinful reaction.

TEXT  22

vaSaa&iSa Jaq<aaRiNa YaQaa ivhaYa

 NavaiNa Ga*õaiTa Narae_Parai<a )

TaQaa Xarqrai<a ivhaYa Jaq<aaR‚

 NYaNYaaiNa Sa&YaaiTa NavaiNa dehq )) 22 ))

väsäàsi jérëäni yathä vihäya
naväni gåhëäti naro ’paräëi
tathä çaréräëi vihäya jérëäny
anyäni saàyäti naväni dehé

SYNONYMS

väsäàsi—garments; jérëäni—old and worn out; yathä—just as; vihäya—giving
up; naväni—new garments; gåhëäti—does accept; naraù—a man;
aparäëi—others; tathä—in the same way; çaréräëi—bodies; vihäya—giving up;
jirëäni—old and useless; anyäni—different; saàyäti—verily accepts;
naväni—new sets; dehé—the embodied.

TRANSLATION

As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, the soul similarly

accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.

PURPORT

Change of body by the atomic individual soul is an accepted fact. Even the
modern  scientists  who  do  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  soul,  but  at  the
same time cannot explain the source of energy from the heart, have to accept
continuous  changes  of  body  which  appear  from  childhood  to  boyhood  and
from  boyhood  to  youth  and  again  from  youth  to  old  age.  From  old  age,  the
change  is  transferred  to  another  body.  This  has  already  been  explained  in  a
previous verse (2.13).

Transference of the atomic individual soul to another body is made possible
by  the  grace  of  the  Supersoul.  The  Supersoul  fulfills  the  desire  of  the  atomic
soul as one friend fulfills the desire of another. The Vedas, like the Muëòaka
Upaniñad,  as  well  as  the  Çvetäçvatara  Upaniñad,  compare  the  soul  and  the
Supersoul to two friendly birds sitting on the same tree. One of the birds (the
individual  atomic  soul)  is  eating  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  and  the  other  bird
(Kåñëa) is simply watching His friend. Of these two birds—although they are
the same in quality—one is captivated by the fruits of the material tree, while
the  other  is  simply  witnessing  the  activities  of  His  friend.  Kåñëa  is  the
witnessing bird, and Arjuna is the eating bird. Although they are friends, one
is  still  the  master  and  the  other  is  the  servant.  Forgetfulness  of  this
relationship by the atomic soul is the cause of one’s changing his position from
one  tree  to  another,  or  from  one  body  to  another.  The  jéva  soul  is  struggling
very hard on the tree of the material body, but as soon as he agrees to accept
the  other  bird  as  the  supreme  spiritual  master—as  Arjuna  agreed  to  do  by
voluntary  surrender  unto  Kåñëa  for  instruction—the  subordinate  bird
immediately becomes free from all lamentations. Both the Muëòaka Upaniñad
(3.1.2) and Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (4.7) confirm this:

samäne våkñe puruño nimagno
’néçayä çocati muhyamänaù
juñöaà yadä paçyaty anyam éçam
asya mahimänam iti véta-çokaù

“Although  the  two  birds  are  in  the  same  tree,  the  eating  bird  is  fully
engrossed with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits of the tree.
But if in some way or other he turns his face to his friend who is the Lord and
knows His glories—at once the suffering bird becomes free from all anxieties.”
Arjuna  has  now  turned  his  face  towards  his  eternal  friend,  Kåñëa,  and  is
understanding the Bhagavad-gétä from Him. And thus, hearing from Kåñëa, he
can understand the supreme glories of the Lord and be free from lamentation.

Arjuna is advised herewith by the Lord not to lament for the bodily change
of his old grandfather and his teacher. He should rather be happy to kill their
bodies  in  the  righteous  fight  so  that  they  may  be  cleansed  at  once  of  all
reactions  from  various  bodily  activities.  One  who  lays  down  his  life  on  the
sacrificial  altar,  or  in  the  proper  battlefield,  is  at  once  cleansed  of  bodily
reactions  and  promoted  to  a  higher  status  of  life.  So  there  was  no  cause  for
Arjuna’s lamentation.

TEXT  23

NaENa& i^NdiNTa Xañai<a NaENa& dhiTa Paavk-" )

Na cENa& ©e-dYaNTYaaPaae Na XaaezYaiTa MaaåTa" )) 23 ))

nainaà chindanti çasträëi
nainaà dahati pävakaù
na cainaà kledayanty äpo
na çoñayati märutaù

SYNONYMS

na—never; enam—this soul; chindanti—can cut to pieces; çasträëi—weapons;
na—never; enam—this soul; dahati—burns; pävakaù—fire; na—never;

ca—also; enam—this soul; kledayanti—moistens; äpaù—water; na—never;
çoñayati—dries; märutaù—wind.

TRANSLATION

The soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor burned by fire, nor

moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.

PURPORT

All  kinds  of  weapons—swords,  flame  weapons,  rain  weapons,  tornado
weapons,  etc.—are  unable  to  kill  the  spirit  soul.  It  appears  that  there  were
many kinds of weapons made of earth, water, air, ether, etc., in addition to the
modern  weapons  of  fire.  Even  the  nuclear  weapons  of  the  modern  age  are
classified as fire weapons, but formerly there were other weapons made of all
different  types  of  material  elements.  Firearms  were  counteracted  by  water
weapons,  which  are  now  unknown  to  modern  science.  Nor  do  modern
scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons. Nonetheless, the soul can never
be  cut  into  pieces,  nor  annihilated  by  any  number  of  weapons,  regardless  of
scientific devices.

The Mäyävädé cannot explain how the individual soul came into existence
simply by ignorance and consequently became covered by illusory energy. Nor
was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the original Supreme Soul;
rather, the individual souls are eternally separated parts of the Supreme Soul.
Because they are atomic individual souls eternally (sanätana), they are prone
to be covered by the illusory energy, and thus they become separated from the
association  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  just  as  the  sparks  of  a  fire,  although  one  in
quality with the fire, are prone to be extinguished when out of the fire. In the
Varäha Puräëa, the living entities are described as separated parts and parcels
of the Supreme. They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gétä also. So,
even  after  being  liberated  from  illusion,  the  living  entity  remains  a  separate
identity,  as  is  evident  from  the  teachings  of  the  Lord  to  Arjuna.  Arjuna
became liberated by the knowledge received from Kåñëa, but he never became
one with Kåñëa.

TEXT  24

AC^eÛae_YaMadaùae_YaMa©e-Ûae_XaaeZYa Wv c )

iNaTYa" SavRGaTa" SQaa<aurcl/ae_Ya& SaNaaTaNa" )) 24 ))

acchedyo ’yam adähyo ’yam
akledyo ’çoñya eva ca
nityaù sarva-gataù sthäëur
acalo ’yaà sanätanaù

SYNONYMS

acchedyaù—unbreakable; ayam—this soul; adähyaù—unable to be burned;
ayam—this soul; akledyaù—insoluble; açoñyaù—not able to be dried;
eva—certainly; ca—and; nityaù—everlasting; sarva-gataù—all-pervading;
sthäëuù—unchangeable; acalaù—immovable; ayam—this soul;
sanätanaù—eternally the same.

TRANSLATION

This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither burned
nor dried. He is everlasting, present everywhere, unchangeable, immovable and
eternally the same.

PURPORT

All  these  qualifications  of  the  atomic  soul  definitely  prove  that  the
individual  soul  is  eternally  the  atomic  particle  of  the  spirit  whole,  and  he
remains  the  same  atom  eternally,  without  change.  The  theory  of  monism  is
very  difficult  to  apply  in  this  case,  because  the  individual  soul  is  never
expected  to  become  one  homogeneously.  After  liberation  from  material
contamination, the atomic soul may prefer to remain as a spiritual spark in the
effulgent rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the intelligent souls

enter into the spiritual planets to associate with the Personality of Godhead.

The  word  sarva-gata  (“all-pervading”)  is  significant  because  there  is  no
doubt that living entities are all over God’s creation. They live on the land, in
the  water,  in  the  air,  within  the  earth  and  even  within  fire.  The  belief  that
they are sterilized in fire is not acceptable, because it is clearly stated here that
the soul cannot be burned by fire. Therefore, there is no doubt that there are
living  entities  also  in  the  sun  planet  with  suitable  bodies  to  live  there.  If  the
sun 
sarva-gata—“living
then 
everywhere”—becomes meaningless.

uninhabited, 

the  word 

globe 

is 

TEXT  25

AVYa¢-ae_YaMaicNTYaae_YaMaivk-aYaaeR_YaMauCYaTae )

TaSMaadev& ividTvENa& NaaNauXaaeicTauMahRiSa )) 25 ))

avyakto ’yam acintyo ’yam
avikäryo ’yam ucyate
tasmäd evaà viditvainaà
nänuçocitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

avyaktaù—invisible; ayam—this soul; acintyaù—inconceivable; ayam—this
soul; avikäryaù—unchangeable; ayam—this soul; ucyate—is said;
tasmät—therefore; evam—like this; viditvä—knowing it well; enam—this soul;
na—do not; anuçocitum—to lament; arhasi—you deserve.

TRANSLATION

It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable and immutable. Knowing

this, you should not grieve for the body.

PURPORT

As  described  previously,  the  magnitude  of  the  soul  is  so  small  for  our
material  calculation  that  he  cannot  be  seen  even  by  the  most  powerful
microscope;  therefore,  he  is  invisible.  As  far  as  the  soul’s  existence  is
concerned, no one can establish his existence experimentally beyond the proof
of  çruti,  or  Vedic  wisdom.  We  have  to  accept  this  truth,  because  there  is  no
other source of understanding the existence of the soul, although it is a fact by
perception.  There  are  many  things  we  have  to  accept  solely  on  grounds  of
superior  authority.  No  one  can  deny  the  existence  of  his  father,  based  upon
the authority of his mother. There is no source of understanding the identity
of  the  father  except  by  the  authority  of  the  mother.  Similarly,  there  is  no
source of understanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words,
the  soul  is  inconceivable  by  human  experimental  knowledge.  The  soul  is
consciousness and conscious—that also is the statement of the Vedas, and we
have to accept that. Unlike the bodily changes, there is no change in the soul.
As  eternally  unchangeable,  the  soul  remains  atomic  in  comparison  to  the
infinite  Supreme  Soul.  The  Supreme  Soul  is  infinite,  and  the  atomic  soul  is
infinitesimal. Therefore, the infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never
become  equal  to  the  infinite  soul,  or  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.
This  concept  is  repeated  in  the  Vedas  in  different  ways  just  to  confirm  the
stability of the conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary in
order that we understand the matter thoroughly, without error.

TEXT  26

AQa cENa& iNaTYaJaaTa& iNaTYa& va MaNYaSae Ma*TaMa( )

TaQaaiPa Tv& Mahabahae NaENa& XaaeicTauMahRiSa )) 26 ))

atha cainaà nitya-jätaà
nityaà vä manyase måtam
tathäpi tvaà mahä-bäho
nainaà çocitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

atha—if, however; ca—also; enam—this soul; nitya-jätam—always born;
nityam—forever; vä—either; manyase—you so think; måtam—dead; tathä
api—still; tvam—you; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one; na—never;
enam—about the soul; çocitum—to lament; arhasi—deserve.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you think that the soul [or the symptoms of life] is always born

and dies forever, you still have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.

PURPORT

There is always a class of philosophers, almost akin to the Buddhists, who do
not believe in the separate existence of the soul beyond the body. When Lord
Kåñëa spoke the Bhagavad-gétä, it appears that such philosophers existed, and
they  were  known  as  the  lokäyatikas  and  vaibhäñikas.  Such  philosophers
maintain  that  life  symptoms  take  place  at  a  certain  mature  condition  of
material  combination.  The  modern  material  scientist  and  materialist
philosophers  also  think  similarly.  According  to  them,  the  body  is  a
combination  of  physical  elements,  and  at  a  certain  stage  the  life  symptoms
develop by interaction of the physical and chemical elements. The science of
anthropology 
is  based  on  this  philosophy.  Currently,  many  pseudo
religions—now  becoming  fashionable  in  America—are  also  adhering  to  this
philosophy, as well as to the nihilistic nondevotional Buddhist sects.

Even  if  Arjuna  did  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  soul—as  in  the
vaibhäñika philosophy—there would still have been no cause for lamentation.
No  one  laments  the  loss  of  a  certain  bulk  of  chemicals  and  stops  discharging
his  prescribed  duty.  On  the  other  hand,  in  modern  science  and  scientific
warfare,  so  many  tons  of  chemicals  are  wasted  for  achieving  victory  over  the
enemy.  According  to  the  vaibhäñika  philosophy,  the  so-called  soul  or  ätmä
vanishes  along  with  the  deterioration  of  the  body.  So,  in  any  case,  whether

Arjuna  accepted  the  Vedic  conclusion  that  there  is  an  atomic  soul  or  he  did
not believe in the existence of the soul, he had no reason to lament. According
to this theory, since there are so many living entities generating out of matter
every  moment,  and  so  many  of  them  are  being  vanquished  every  moment,
there is no need to grieve for such incidents. If there were no rebirth for the
soul,  Arjuna  had  no  reason  to  be  afraid  of  being  affected  by  sinful  reactions
due  to  his  killing  his  grandfather  and  teacher.  But  at  the  same  time,  Kåñëa
sarcastically  addressed  Arjuna  as  mahä-bähu,  mighty-armed,  because  He,  at
least, did not accept the theory of the vaibhäñikas, which leaves aside the Vedic
wisdom. As a kñatriya, Arjuna belonged to the Vedic culture, and it behooved
him to continue to follow its principles.

TEXT  27

JaaTaSYa ih Da]uvae Ma*TYauDa]uRv& JaNMa Ma*TaSYa c )

TaSMaadPairhaYaeR_QaeR Na Tv& XaaeicTauMahRiSa )) 27 ))

jätasya hi dhruvo måtyur
dhruvaà janma måtasya ca
tasmäd aparihärye ’rthe
na tvaà çocitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

jätasya—of one who has taken his birth; hi—certainly; dhruvaù—a fact;
måtyuù—death; dhruvam—it is also a fact; janma—birth; måtasya—of the
dead; ca—also; tasmät—therefore; aparihärye—of that which is unavoidable;
arthe—in the matter; na—do not; tvam—you; çocitum—to lament;
arhasi—deserve.

TRANSLATION

One who has taken his birth is sure to die, and after death one is sure to
take birth again. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you

should not lament.

PURPORT

One  has  to  take  birth  according  to  one’s  activities  of  life.  And  after
finishing  one  term  of  activities,  one  has  to  die  to  take  birth  for  the  next.  In
this  way  one  is  going  through  one  cycle  of  birth  and  death  after  another
without  liberation.  This  cycle  of  birth  and  death  does  not,  however,  support
unnecessary murder, slaughter and war. But at the same time, violence and war
are inevitable factors in human society for keeping law and order.

The Battle of Kurukñetra, being the will of the Supreme, was an inevitable
event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of a kñatriya. Why should he
be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of his relatives since he was discharging
his  proper  duty?  He  did  not  deserve  to  break  the  law,  thereby  becoming
subjected to the reactions of sinful acts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding
the discharge of his proper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his
relatives, and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path of
action.

TEXT  28

AVYa¢-adqiNa >aUTaaiNa VYa¢-MaDYaaiNa >aarTa )

AVYa¢-iNaDaNaaNYaev Ta}a k-a PairdevNaa )) 28 ))

avyaktädéni bhütäni
vyakta-madhyäni bhärata
avyakta-nidhanäny eva
tatra kä paridevanä

SYNONYMS

avyakta-ädéni—in the beginning unmanifested; bhütäni—all that are created;
vyakta—manifested; madhyäni—in the middle; bhärata—O descendant of
Bharata; avyakta—nonmanifested; nidhanäni—when vanquished; eva—it is all

like that; tatra—therefore; kä—what; paridevanä—lamentation.

TRANSLATION

All created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their

interim state, and unmanifest again when annihilated. So what need is there for
lamentation?

PURPORT

Accepting  that  there  are  two  classes  of  philosophers,  one  believing  in  the
existence of the soul and the other not believing in the existence of the soul,
there is no cause for lamentation in either case. Nonbelievers in the existence
of  the  soul  are  called  atheists  by  followers  of  Vedic  wisdom.  Yet  even  if,  for
argument’s  sake,  we  accept  this  atheistic  theory,  there  is  still  no  cause  for
lamentation.  Apart  from  the  separate  existence  of  the  soul,  the  material
elements  remain  unmanifested  before  creation.  From  this  subtle  state  of
nonmanifestation  comes  manifestation,  just  as  from  ether,  air  is  generated;
from air, fire is generated; from fire, water is generated; and from water, earth
becomes  manifested.  From  the  earth,  many  varieties  of  manifestations  take
place. Take, for example, a big skyscraper manifested from the earth. When it
is  dismantled,  the  manifestation  becomes  again  unmanifested  and  remains  as
atoms in the ultimate stage. The law of conservation of energy remains, but in
course of time things are manifested and unmanifested—that is the difference.
Then what cause is there for lamentation either in the stage of manifestation
or  in  unmanifestation?  Somehow  or  other,  even  in  the  unmanifested  stage,
things are not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elements remain
unmanifested,  and  only  in  the  middle  are  they  manifested,  and  this  does  not
make any real material difference.

And if we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä that
these  material  bodies  are  perishable  in  due  course  of  time  (antavanta  ime
dehäù)  but  that  the  soul  is  eternal  (nityasyoktäù  çarériëaù),  then  we  must
remember  always  that  the  body  is  like  a  dress;  therefore  why  lament  the
changing of a dress? The material body has no factual existence in relation to

the  eternal  soul.  It  is  something  like  a  dream.  In  a  dream  we  may  think  of
flying in the sky, or sitting on a chariot as a king, but when we wake up we can
see that we are neither in the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom
encourages  self-realization  on  the  basis  of  the  nonexistence  of  the  material
body.  Therefore,  in  either  case,  whether  one  believes  in  the  existence  of  the
soul or one does not believe in the existence of the soul, there is no cause for
lamentation for loss of the body.

TEXT  29

AaêYaRvTPaXYaiTa k-iêdeNa‚

 MaaêYaRvÜdiTa TaQaEv caNYa" )

AaêYaRvÀENaMaNYa" é*<aaeiTa

 é[uTvaPYaeNa& ved Na cEv k-iêTa( )) 29 ))

äçcarya-vat paçyati kaçcid enam
äçcarya-vad vadati tathaiva cänyaù
äçcarya-vac cainam anyaù çåëoti
çrutväpy enaà veda na caiva kaçcit

SYNONYMS

äçcarya-vat—as amazing; paçyati—sees; kaçcit—someone; enam—this soul;
äçcarya-vat—as amazing; vadati—speaks of; tathä—thus; eva—certainly;
ca—also; anyaù—another; äçcarya-vat—similarly amazing; ca—also;
enam—this soul; anyaù—another; çåëoti—hears of; çrutvä—having heard;
api—even; enam—this soul; veda—knows; na—never; ca—and;
eva—certainly; kaçcit—someone.

TRANSLATION

Some look on the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and some

hear of him as amazing, while others, even after hearing about him, cannot

understand him at all.

PURPORT

Since  Gétopaniñad is largely based on the principles of the Upaniñads, it is

not surprising to also find this passage in the Kaöha Upaniñad (1.2.7):

çravaëayäpi bahubhir yo na labhyaù
çåëvanto ’pi bahavo yaà na vidyuù
äçcaryo vaktä kuçalo ’sya labdhä
äçcaryo ’sya jïätä kuçalänuçiñöaù

The fact that the atomic soul is within the body of a gigantic animal, in the
body  of  a  gigantic  banyan  tree,  and  also  in  the  microbic  germs,  millions  and
billions of which occupy only an inch of space, is certainly very amazing. Men
with  a  poor  fund  of  knowledge  and  men  who  are  not  austere  cannot
understand the wonders of the individual atomic spark of spirit, even though it
is explained by the greatest authority of knowledge, who imparted lessons even
to  Brahmä,  the  first  living  being  in  the  universe.  Owing  to  a  gross  material
conception  of  things,  most  men  in  this age cannot imagine how such a small
particle can become both so great and so small. So men look at the soul proper
as  wonderful  either  by  constitution  or  by  description.  Illusioned  by  the
material  energy,  people  are  so  engrossed  in  subject  matters  for  sense
gratification  that  they  have  very  little  time  to  understand  the  question  of
self-understanding,  even 
this
it 
self-understanding  all  activities  result  in  ultimate  defeat  in  the  struggle  for
existence. Perhaps they have no idea that one must think of the soul, and thus
make a solution to the material miseries.

that  without 

though 

is  a 

fact 

Some  people  who  are  inclined  to  hear  about  the  soul  may  be  attending
lectures,  in  good  association,  but  sometimes,  owing  to  ignorance,  they  are
misguided by acceptance of the Supersoul and the atomic soul as one without
distinction  of  magnitude.  It  is  very  difficult  to  find  a  man  who  perfectly
understands  the  position  of  the  Supersoul,  the  atomic  soul,  their  respective
functions  and  relationships  and  all  other  major  and  minor  details.  And  it  is

still  more  difficult  to  find  a  man  who  has  actually  derived  full  benefit  from
knowledge of the soul, and who is able to describe the position of the soul in
different  aspects.  But  if,  somehow  or  other,  one  is  able  to  understand  the
subject matter of the soul, then one’s life is successful.

The easiest process for understanding the subject matter of self, however, is
to accept the statements of the Bhagavad-gétä spoken by the greatest authority,
Lord  Kåñëa,  without  being  deviated  by  other  theories.  But  it  also  requires  a
great deal of penance and sacrifice, either in this life or in the previous ones,
before  one  is  able  to  accept  Kåñëa  as  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.
Kåñëa  can,  however,  be  known  as  such  by  the  causeless  mercy  of  the  pure
devotee and by no other way.

TEXT  30

dehq iNaTYaMavDYaae_Ya& dehe SavRSYa >aarTa )

TaSMaaTSavaRi<a >aUTaaiNa Na Tv& XaaeicTauMahRiSa )) 30 ))

dehé nityam avadhyo ’yaà
dehe sarvasya bhärata
tasmät sarväëi bhütäni
na tvaà çocitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

dehé—the owner of the material body; nityam—eternally; avadhyaù—cannot
be killed; ayam—this soul; dehe—in the body; sarvasya—of everyone;
bhärata—O descendant of Bharata; tasmät—therefore; sarväëi—all;
bhütäni—living entities (that are born); na—never; tvam—you; çocitum—to
lament; arhasi—deserve.

TRANSLATION

O descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body can never be slain.

Therefore you need not grieve for any living being.

PURPORT

The Lord now concludes the chapter of instruction on the immutable spirit
soul.  In  describing  the  immortal  soul  in  various  ways,  Lord  Kåñëa  establishes
that  the  soul  is  immortal  and  the  body  is  temporary.  Therefore  Arjuna  as  a
kñatriya  should  not  abandon  his  duty  out  of  fear  that  his  grandfather  and
teacher—Bhéñma  and  Droëa—will  die  in  the  battle.  On  the  authority  of  Çré
Kåñëa, one has to believe that there is a soul different from the material body,
not  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  soul,  or  that  living  symptoms  develop  at  a
certain stage of material maturity resulting from the interaction of chemicals.
Though the soul is immortal, violence is not encouraged, but at the time of war
it  is  not  discouraged  when  there  is  actual  need  for  it.  That  need  must  be
justified in terms of the sanction of the Lord, and not capriciously.

TEXT  31

SvDaMaRMaiPa cave+Ya Na ivk-iMPaTauMahRiSa )

DaMYaaRiÖ YauÖaC^\eYaae_NYaT+ai}aYaSYa Na ivÛTae )) 31 ))

sva-dharmam api cävekñya
na vikampitum arhasi
dharmyäd dhi yuddhäc chreyo ’nyat
kñatriyasya na vidyate

SYNONYMS

sva-dharmam—one’s own religious principles; api—also; ca—indeed;
avekñya—considering; na—never; vikampitum—to hesitate; arhasi—you
deserve; dharmyät—for religious principles; hi—indeed; yuddhät—than
fighting; çreyaù—better engagement; anyat—any other; kñatriyasya—of the
kñatriya; na—does not; vidyate—exist.

TRANSLATION

Considering your specific duty as a kñatriya, you should know that there is
no better engagement for you than fighting on religious principles; and so there
is no need for hesitation.

PURPORT

Out  of  the  four  orders  of  social  administration,  the  second  order,  for  the
matter  of  good  administration,  is  called  kñatriya.  Kñat  means  hurt.  One  who
gives protection from harm is called kñatriya (träyate—to give protection). The
kñatriyas  are  trained  for  killing  in  the  forest.  A  kñatriya  would  go  into  the
forest and challenge a tiger face to face and fight with the tiger with his sword.
When  the  tiger  was  killed,  it  would  be  offered  the  royal  order  of  cremation.
This system has been followed even up to the present day by the kñatriya kings
of  Jaipur  state.  The  kñatriyas  are  specially  trained  for  challenging  and  killing
because religious violence is sometimes a necessary factor. Therefore, kñatriyas
are never meant for accepting directly the order of sannyäsa, or renunciation.
Nonviolence  in  politics  may  be  a  diplomacy,  but  it  is  never  a  factor  or
principle. In the religious law books it is stated:

ähaveñu mitho ’nyonyaà
jighäàsanto mahé-kñitaù
yuddhamänäù paraà çaktyä
svargaà yänty aparäì-mukhäù

yajïeñu paçavo brahman
hanyante satataà dvijaiù
saàskåtäù kila mantraiç ca
te ’pi svargam aväpnuvan

“In the battlefield, a king or kñatriya, while fighting another king envious of
him,  is  eligible  for  achieving  heavenly  planets  after  death,  as  the  brähmaëas
also  attain  the  heavenly  planets  by  sacrificing  animals  in  the  sacrificial  fire.”

Therefore, killing on the battlefield on religious principles and killing animals
in  the  sacrificial  fire  are  not  at  all  considered  to  be  acts  of  violence,  because
everyone  is  benefited  by  the  religious  principles  involved.  The  animal
sacrificed  gets  a  human  life  immediately  without  undergoing  the  gradual
evolutionary process from one form to another, and the kñatriyas killed on the
battlefield  also  attain  the  heavenly  planets  as  do  the  brähmaëas  who  attain
them by offering sacrifice.

There  are  two  kinds  of  sva-dharmas,  specific  duties.  As  long  as  one  is  not
liberated,  one  has  to  perform  the  duties  of  his  particular  body  in  accordance
with religious principles in order to achieve liberation. When one is liberated,
one’s sva-dharma—specific duty—becomes spiritual and is not in the material
bodily concept. In the bodily conception of life there are specific duties for the
brähmaëas  and  kñatriyas  respectively,  and  such  duties  are  unavoidable.
Sva-dharma  is  ordained  by  the  Lord,  and  this  will  be  clarified  in  the  Fourth
Chapter.  On  the  bodily  plane  sva-dharma  is  called  varëäçrama-dharma,  or
man’s  steppingstone  for  spiritual  understanding.  Human  civilization  begins
from the stage of varëäçrama-dharma, or specific duties in terms of the specific
modes of nature of the body obtained. Discharging one’s specific duty in any
field  of  action  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  higher  authorities  serves  to
elevate one to a higher status of life.

TEXT  32

Yad*C^Yaa caePaPaà& SvGaRÜarMaPaav*TaMa( )

Saui%Na" +ai}aYaa" PaaQaR l/>aNTae YauÖMaqd*XaMa( )) 32 ))

yadåcchayä copapannaà
svarga-dväram apävåtam
sukhinaù kñatriyäù pärtha
labhante yuddham édåçam

SYNONYMS

yadåcchayä—by its own accord; ca—also; upapannam—arrived at; svarga—of
the heavenly planets; dväram—door; apävåtam—wide open; sukhinaù—very
happy; kñatriyäù—the members of the royal order; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
labhante—do achieve; yuddham—war; édåçam—like this.

TRANSLATION

O Pärtha, happy are the kñatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities come

unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.

PURPORT

As  supreme  teacher  of  the  world,  Lord  Kåñëa  condemns  the  attitude  of
Arjuna,  who  said,  “I  do  not  find  any  good  in  this  fighting.  It  will  cause
perpetual  habitation  in  hell.”  Such  statements  by  Arjuna  were  due  to
ignorance  only.  He  wanted  to  become  nonviolent  in  the  discharge  of  his
specific duty. For a kñatriya to be on the battlefield and to become nonviolent
is  the  philosophy  of  fools.  In  the  Paräçara-småti,  or  religious  codes  made  by
Paräçara, the great sage and father of Vyäsadeva, it is stated:

kñatriyo hi prajä rakñan
çastra-päëiù pradaëòayan
nirjitya para-sainyädi
kñitià dharmeëa pälayet

“The  kñatriya’s  duty  is  to  protect  the  citizens  from  all  kinds  of  difficulties,
and for that reason he has to apply violence in suitable cases for law and order.
Therefore  he  has  to  conquer  the  soldiers  of  inimical  kings,  and  thus,  with
religious principles, he should rule over the world.”

Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting. If he
should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if he should die
in the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planets, whose doors were
wide open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit in either case.

TEXT  33

AQa cetviMaMa& DaMYa| Sa°aMa& Na k-irZYaiSa )

TaTa" SvDaMa| k-IiTa| c ihTva PaaPaMavaPSYaiSa )) 33 ))

atha cet tvam imaà dharmyaà
saìgrämaà na kariñyasi
tataù sva-dharmaà kértià ca
hitvä päpam aväpsyasi

SYNONYMS

atha—therefore; cet—if; tvam—you; imam—this; dharmyam—as a religious
duty; saìgrämam—fighting; na—do not; kariñyasi—perform; tataù—then;
sva-dharmam—your religious duty; kértim—reputation; ca—also;
hitvä—losing; päpam—sinful reaction; aväpsyasi—will gain.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you do not perform your religious duty of fighting, then you
will certainly incur sins for neglecting your duties and thus lose your reputation
as a fighter.

PURPORT

Arjuna was a famous fighter, and he attained fame by fighting many great
demigods, including even Lord Çiva. After fighting and defeating Lord Çiva in
the  dress  of  a  hunter,  Arjuna  pleased  the  lord  and  received  as  a  reward  a
weapon  called  päçupata-astra.  Everyone  knew  that  he  was  a  great  warrior.
Even Droëäcärya gave him benedictions and awarded him the special weapon
by  which  he  could  kill  even  his  teacher.  So  he  was  credited  with  so  many
military certificates from many authorities, including his adopted father Indra,
the heavenly king. But if he abandoned the battle, not only would he neglect
his  specific  duty  as  a  kñatriya,  but  he  would  lose  all  his  fame  and  good  name
and thus prepare his royal road to hell. In other words, he would go to hell, not

by fighting, but by withdrawing from battle.

TEXT  34

Ak-IiTa| caiPa >aUTaaiNa k-QaiYaZYaiNTa Tae_VYaYaaMa( )

SaM>aaivTaSYa cak-IiTaRMaRr<aadiTairCYaTae )) 34 ))

akértià cäpi bhütäni
kathayiñyanti te ’vyayäm
sambhävitasya cäkértir
maraëäd atiricyate

SYNONYMS

akértim—infamy; ca—also; api—over and above; bhütäni—all people;
kathayiñyanti—will speak; te—of you; avyayäm—forever; sambhävitasya—for a
respectable man; ca—also; akértiù—ill fame; maraëät—than death;
atiricyate—becomes more.

TRANSLATION

People will always speak of your infamy, and for a respectable person,

dishonor is worse than death.

PURPORT

Both as friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Kåñëa now gives His final
judgment  regarding  Arjuna’s  refusal  to  fight.  The  Lord  says,  “Arjuna,  if  you
leave  the  battlefield  before  the  battle  even  begins,  people  will  call  you  a
coward. And if you think that people may call you bad names but that you will
save your life by fleeing the battlefield, then My advice is that you’d do better
to  die  in  the  battle.  For  a  respectable  man  like  you,  ill  fame  is  worse  than
death. So, you should not flee for fear of your life; better to die in the battle.
That will save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and from losing

your prestige in society.”

So, the final judgment of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battle and

not withdraw.

TEXT  35

>aYaad]<aaduParTa& Ma&SYaNTae Tva& MaharQaa" )

Yaeza& c Tv& bhuMaTaae >aUTva YaaSYaiSa l/agavMa( )) 35 ))

bhayäd raëäd uparataà
maàsyante tväà mahä-rathäù
yeñäà ca tvaà bahu-mato
bhütvä yäsyasi läghavam

SYNONYMS

bhayät—out of fear; raëät—from the battlefield; uparatam—ceased;
maàsyante—they will consider; tväm—you; mahä-rathäù—the great generals;
yeñäm—for whom; ca—also; tvam—you; bahu-mataù—in great estimation;
bhütvä—having been; yäsyasi—you will go; läghavam—decreased in value.

TRANSLATION

The great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will think

that you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thus they will consider
you insignificant.

PURPORT

Lord Kåñëa continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: “Do not think that the
great  generals  like  Duryodhana,  Karëa,  and  other  contemporaries  will  think
that  you  have  left  the  battlefield  out  of  compassion  for  your  brothers  and
grandfather. They will think that you have left out of fear for your life. And
thus their high estimation of your personality will go to hell.”

TEXT  36

AvaCYavada&ê bhUNvidZYaiNTa TavaihTaa" )

iNaNdNTaSTav SaaMaQYa| TaTaae du"%Tar& Nau ik-Ma( )) 36 ))

aväcya-vädäàç ca bahün
vadiñyanti tavähitäù
nindantas tava sämarthyaà
tato duùkhataraà nu kim

SYNONYMS

aväcya—unkind; vädän—fabricated words; ca—also; bahün—many;
vadiñyanti—will say; tava—your; ahitäù—enemies; nindantaù—while vilifying;
tava—your; sämarthyam—ability; tataù—than that; duùkha-taram—more
painful; nu—of course; kim—what is there.

TRANSLATION

Your enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your

ability. What could be more painful for you?

PURPORT

Lord  Kåñëa  was  astonished  in  the  beginning  at  Arjuna’s  uncalled-for  plea
for compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting the non-Äryans.
Now  in  so  many  words,  He  has  proved  His  statements  against  Arjuna’s
so-called compassion.

TEXT  37

hTaae va Pa[aPSYaiSa SvGa| iJaTva va >aae+YaSae MahqMa( )

TaSMaaduitaï k-aENTaeYa YauÖaYa k*-TaiNaêYa" )) 37 ))

hato vä präpsyasi svargaà
jitvä vä bhokñyase mahém
tasmäd uttiñöha kaunteya
yuddhäya kåta-niçcayaù

SYNONYMS

hataù—being killed; vä—either; präpsyasi—you gain; svargam—the heavenly
kingdom; jitvä—by conquering; vä—or; bhokñyase—you enjoy; mahém—the
world; tasmät—therefore; uttiñöha—get up; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
yuddhäya—to fight; kåta—determined; niçcayaù—in certainty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunté, either you will be killed on the battlefield and attain the

heavenly planets, or you will conquer and enjoy the earthly kingdom.
Therefore, get up with determination and fight.

PURPORT

Even though there was no certainty of victory for Arjuna’s side, he still had
to  fight;  for,  even  being  killed  there,  he  could  be  elevated  into  the  heavenly
planets.

TEXT  38

Sau%du"%e SaMae k*-Tva l/a>aal/a>aaE JaYaaJaYaaE )

TaTaae YauÖaYa YauJYaSv NaEv& PaaPaMavaPSYaiSa )) 38 ))

sukha-duùkhe same kåtvä
läbhäläbhau jayäjayau
tato yuddhäya yujyasva

naivaà päpam aväpsyasi

SYNONYMS

sukha—happiness; duùkhe—and distress; same—in equanimity; kåtvä—doing
so; läbha-aläbhau—both profit and loss; jaya-ajayau—both victory and defeat;
tataù—thereafter; yuddhäya—for the sake of fighting; yujyasva—engage
(fight); na—never; evam—in this way; päpam—sinful reaction;
aväpsyasi—you will gain.

TRANSLATION

Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness or
distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat—and by so doing you shall never incur
sin.

PURPORT

Lord  Kåñëa  now  directly  says  that  Arjuna  should  fight  for  the  sake  of
fighting because He desires the battle. There is no consideration of happiness
or  distress,  profit  or  gain,  victory  or  defeat  in  the  activities  of  Kåñëa
consciousness.  That  everything  should  be  performed  for  the  sake  of  Kåñëa  is
transcendental consciousness; so there is no reaction to material activities. He
who  acts  for  his  own  sense  gratification,  either  in  goodness  or  in  passion,  is
subject  to  the  reaction,  good  or  bad.  But  he  who  has  completely  surrendered
himself in the activities of Kåñëa consciousness is no longer obliged to anyone,
nor is he a debtor to anyone, as one is in the ordinary course of activities. It is
said:

devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam

“Anyone who has completely surrendered unto Kåñëa, Mukunda, giving up
all  other  duties,  is  no  longer  a  debtor,  nor  is  he  obliged  to  anyone—not  the

demigods, nor the sages, nor the people in general, nor kinsmen, nor humanity,
nor  forefathers.”  (Bhäg.  11.5.41)  That  is  the  indirect  hint  given  by  Kåñëa  to
Arjuna  in  this  verse,  and  the  matter  will  be  more  clearly  explained  in  the
following verses.

TEXT  39

Wza Tae_i>aihTaa Saa&:Yae buiÖYaaeRGae iTvMaa& é*<au )

buÖya Yau¢-ae YaYaa PaaQaR k-MaRbNDa& Pa[haSYaiSa )) 39 ))

eñä te ’bhihitä säìkhye
buddhir yoge tv imäà çåëu
buddhyä yukto yayä pärtha
karma-bandhaà prahäsyasi

SYNONYMS

eñä—all this; te—unto you; abhihitä—described; säìkhye—by analytical study;
buddhiù—intelligence; yoge—in work without fruitive result; tu—but;
imäm—this; çåëu—just hear; buddhyä—by intelligence; yuktaù—dovetailed;
yayä—by which; pärtha—O son of Påthä; karma-bandham—bondage of
reaction; prahäsyasi—you can be released from.

TRANSLATION

Thus far I have described this knowledge to you through analytical study.
Now listen as I explain it in terms of working without fruitive results. O son of
Påthä, when you act in such knowledge you can free yourself from the bondage
of works.

PURPORT

According  to  the  Nirukti,  or  the  Vedic  dictionary,  saìkhyä  means  that
which describes things in detail, and säìkhya refers to that philosophy which

describes the real nature of the soul. And yoga involves controlling the senses.
Arjuna’s proposal not to fight was based on sense gratification. Forgetting his
prime duty, he wanted to cease fighting, because he thought that by not killing
his relatives and kinsmen he would be happier than by enjoying the kingdom
after  conquering  his  cousins  and  brothers,  the  sons  of  Dhåtaräñöra.  In  both
ways, the basic principles were for sense gratification. Happiness derived from
conquering  them  and  happiness  derived  by  seeing  kinsmen  alive  are  both  on
the basis of personal sense gratification, even at a sacrifice of wisdom and duty.
Kåñëa, therefore, wanted to explain to Arjuna that by killing the body of his
grandfather he would not be killing the soul proper, and He explained that all
individual  persons,  including  the  Lord  Himself,  are  eternal  individuals;  they
were individuals in the past, they are individuals in the present, and they will
continue  to  remain  individuals  in  the  future,  because  all  of  us  are  individual
souls  eternally.  We  simply  change  our  bodily  dress  in  different  manners,  but
actually  we  keep  our  individuality  even  after  liberation  from  the  bondage  of
material  dress.  An  analytical  study  of  the  soul  and  the  body  has  been  very
graphically  explained  by  Lord  Kåñëa.  And  this  descriptive  knowledge  of  the
soul  and  the  body  from  different  angles  of  vision  has  been  described  here  as
Säìkhya, in terms of the Nirukti dictionary. This Säìkhya has nothing to do
with  Säìkhya  philosophy  of  the  atheist  Kapila.  Long  before  the  imposter
Kapila’s  Säìkhya, 
the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  by  the  true  Lord  Kapila,  the  incarnation  of  Lord  Kåñëa,
who explained it to His mother, Devahüti. It is clearly explained by Him that
the puruña, or the Supreme Lord, is active and that He creates by looking over
the prakåti. This is accepted in the Vedas and in the Gétä. The description in
the  Vedas  indicates  that  the  Lord  glanced  over  the  prakåti,  or  nature,  and
impregnated it with atomic individual souls. All these individuals are working
in  the  material  world  for  sense  gratification,  and  under  the  spell  of  material
energy  they  are  thinking  of  being  enjoyers.  This  mentality  is  dragged  to  the
last  point  of  liberation  when  the  living  entity  wants  to  become  one  with  the
Lord.  This  is  the  last  snare  of  mäyä,  or  sense  gratificatory  illusion,  and  it  is
only after many, many births of such sense gratificatory activities that a great
soul surrenders unto Väsudeva, Lord Kåñëa, thereby fulfilling the search after

the  Säìkhya  philosophy  was  expounded 

in 

the ultimate truth.

Arjuna  has  already  accepted  Kåñëa  as  his  spiritual  master  by  surrendering
himself  unto  Him:  çiñyas  te  ’haà  çädhi  mäà  tväà  prapannam.  Consequently,
Kåñëa  will  now  tell  him  about  the  working  process  in  buddhi-yoga,  or
karma-yoga, or in other words, the practice of devotional service only for the
sense  gratification  of  the  Lord.  This  buddhi-yoga  is  clearly  explained  in
Chapter  Ten,  verse  ten,  as  being  direct  communion  with  the  Lord,  who  is
sitting as Paramätmä in everyone’s heart. But such communion does not take
place without devotional service. One who is therefore situated in devotional
or  transcendental  loving  service  to  the  Lord,  or,  in  other  words,  in  Kåñëa
consciousness,  attains  to  this  stage  of  buddhi-yoga  by  the  special  grace  of  the
Lord. The Lord says, therefore, that only to those who are always engaged in
devotional  service  out  of  transcendental  love  does  He  award  the  pure
knowledge of devotion in love. In that way the devotee can reach Him easily
in the ever-blissful kingdom of God.

Thus  the  buddhi-yoga  mentioned  in  this  verse  is  the  devotional  service  of
the Lord, and the word Säìkhya mentioned herein has nothing to do with the
atheistic  säìkhya-yoga  enunciated  by  the  imposter  Kapila.  One  should  not,
therefore,  misunderstand  that  the  säìkhya-yoga  mentioned  herein  has  any
connection  with  the  atheistic  Säìkhya.  Nor  did  that  philosophy  have  any
influence during that time; nor would Lord Kåñëa care to mention such godless
philosophical  speculations.  Real  Säìkhya  philosophy  is  described  by  Lord
Kapila  in  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  but  even  that  Säìkhya  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  current  topics.  Here,  Säìkhya  means  analytical  description  of  the
body and the soul. Lord Kåñëa made an analytical description of the soul just
to  bring  Arjuna  to  the  point  of  buddhi-yoga,  or  bhakti-yoga.  Therefore,  Lord
Kåñëa’s Säìkhya and Lord Kapila’s Säìkhya, as described in the Bhägavatam,
are  one  and  the  same.  They  are  all  bhakti-yoga.  Lord  Kåñëa  Said,  therefore,
that  only  the  less  intelligent  class  of  men  make  a  distinction  between
säìkhya-yoga  and  bhakti-yoga  (säìkhya-yogau  påthag  bäläù  pravadanti  na
paëòitäù).

Of  course,  atheistic  säìkhya-yoga  has  nothing  to  do  with  bhakti-yoga,  yet
the  unintelligent  claim  that  the  atheistic  säìkhya-yoga  is  referred  to  in  the

Bhagavad-gétä.

One should therefore understand that buddhi-yoga means to work in Kåñëa
consciousness, in the full bliss and knowledge of devotional service. One who
works  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Lord  only,  however  difficult  such  work  may
be, is working under the principles of buddhi-yoga and finds himself always in
transcendental  bliss.  By  such  transcendental  engagement,  one  achieves  all
transcendental  understanding  automatically,  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  and
thus  his  liberation  is  complete  in  itself,  without  his  making  extraneous
endeavors  to  acquire  knowledge.  There  is  much  difference  between  work  in
Kåñëa  consciousness  and  work  for  fruitive  results,  especially  in  the  matter  of
sense  gratification  for  achieving  results  in  terms  of  family  or  material
happiness. Buddhi-yoga is therefore the transcendental quality of the work that
we perform.

TEXT  40

Naehai>a§-MaNaaXaae_iSTa Pa[TYavaYaae Na ivÛTae )

SvLPaMaPYaSYa DaMaRSYa }aaYaTae MahTaae >aYaaTa( )) 40 ))

nehäbhikrama-näço ’sti
pratyaväyo na vidyate
sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya
träyate mahato bhayät

SYNONYMS

na—there is not; iha—in this yoga; abhikrama—in endeavoring; näçaù—loss;
asti—there is; pratyaväyaù—diminution; na—never; vidyate—there is;
su-alpam—a little; api—although; asya—of this; dharmasya—occupation;
träyate—releases; mahataù—from very great; bhayät—danger.

TRANSLATION

In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on

this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear.

PURPORT

Activity in Kåñëa consciousness, or acting for the benefit of Kåñëa without
expectation  of  sense  gratification,  is  the  highest  transcendental  quality  of
work.  Even  a  small  beginning  of  such  activity  finds  no  impediment,  nor  can
that  small  beginning  be  lost  at  any  stage.  Any  work  begun  on  the  material
plane has to be completed, otherwise the whole attempt becomes a failure. But
any work begun in Kåñëa consciousness has a permanent effect, even though
not finished. The performer of such work is therefore not at a loss even if his
work  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  incomplete.  One  percent  done  in  Kåñëa
consciousness bears permanent results, so that the next beginning is from the
point of two percent, whereas in material activity without a hundred percent
success  there  is  no  profit.  Ajämila  performed  his  duty  in  some  percentage  of
Kåñëa  consciousness,  but  the  result  he  enjoyed  at  the  end  was  a  hundred
percent, by the grace of the Lord. There is a nice verse in this connection in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.17):

tyaktvä sva-dharmaà caraëämbujaà harer
bhajann apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva väbhadram abhüd amuñya kià
ko värtha äpto ’bhajatäà sva-dharmataù

“If  someone  gives  up  his  occupational  duties  and  works  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  and  then  falls  down  on  account  of  not  completing  his  work,
what  loss  is  there  on  his  part?  And  what  can  one  gain  if  one  performs  his
material activities perfectly?” Or, as the Christians say, “What profiteth a man
if he gain the whole world yet suffers the loss of his eternal soul?”

Material activities and their results end with the body. But work in Kåñëa
consciousness carries a person again to Kåñëa consciousness, even after the loss
of the body. At least one is sure to have a chance in the next life of being born
again as a human being, either in the family of a great cultured brähmaëa or in
a  rich  aristocratic  family  that  will  give  one  a  further  chance  for  elevation.

That is the unique quality of work done in Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  41

VYavSaaYaaiTMak-a buiÖreke-h ku-åNaNdNa )

bhuXaa%a ùNaNTaaê buÖYaae_VYavSaaiYaNaaMa( )) 41 ))

vyavasäyätmikä buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-çäkhä hy anantäç ca
buddhayo ’vyavasäyinäm

SYNONYMS

vyavasäya-ätmikä—resolute in Kåñëa consciousness; buddhiù—intelligence;
ekä—only one; iha—in this world; kuru-nandana—O beloved child of the
Kurus; bahu-çäkhäù—having various branches; hi—indeed;
anantäù—unlimited; ca—also; buddhayaù—intelligence; avyavasäyinäm—of
those who are not in Kåñëa consciousness.

TRANSLATION

Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one. O

beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who are irresolute is
many-branched.

PURPORT

A  strong  faith  that  by  Kåñëa  consciousness  one  will  be  elevated  to  the
intelligence.  The

is  called  vyavasäyätmikä 

life 

highest  perfection  of 
Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.62) states:

’çraddhä’-çabde——viçväsa kahe sudåòha niçcaya
kåñëe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kåta haya

Faith means unflinching trust in something sublime. When one is engaged
in  the  duties  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  he  need  not  act  in  relationship  to  the
material world with obligations to family traditions, humanity, or nationality.
Fruitive activities are the engagements of one’s reactions from past good or bad
deeds. When one is awake in Kåñëa consciousness, he need no longer endeavor
for good results in his activities. When one is situated in Kåñëa consciousness,
all  activities  are  on  the  absolute  plane,  for  they  are  no  longer  subject  to
dualities  like  good  and  bad.  The  highest  perfection  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  is
renunciation  of  the  material  conception  of  life.  This  state  is  automatically
achieved by progressive Kåñëa consciousness.

The  resolute  purpose  of  a  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  based  on
knowledge. Väsudevaù sarvam iti sa mahätmä su-durlabhaù: a person in Kåñëa
consciousness  is  the  rare  good  soul  who  knows  perfectly  that  Väsudeva,  or
Kåñëa,  is  the  root  of  all  manifested  causes.  As  by  watering  the  root  of  a  tree
one automatically distributes water to the leaves and branches, so by acting in
Kåñëa consciousness one can render the highest service to everyone—namely
self,  family,  society,  country,  humanity,  etc.  If  Kåñëa  is  satisfied  by  one’s
actions, then everyone will be satisfied.

Service  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is,  however,  best  practiced  under  the  able
guidance of a spiritual master who is a bona fide representative of Kåñëa, who
knows  the  nature  of  the  student  and  who  can  guide  him  to  act  in  Kåñëa
consciousness. As such, to be well versed in Kåñëa consciousness one has to act
firmly  and  obey  the  representative  of  Kåñëa,  and  one  should  accept  the
instruction  of  the  bona  fide  spiritual  master  as  one’s  mission  in  life.  Çréla
Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  instructs  us,  in  his  famous  prayers  for  the
spiritual master, as follows:

yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädo
yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto ’pi
dhyäyan stuvaàs tasya yaças tri-sandhyaà
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam 

“By  satisfaction  of  the  spiritual  master,  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead becomes satisfied. And by not satisfying the spiritual master, there is

no  chance  of  being  promoted  to  the  plane  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  I  should,
therefore,  meditate  and  pray  for  his  mercy  three  times  a  day,  and  offer  my
respectful obeisances unto him, my spiritual master.”

The  whole  process,  however,  depends  on  perfect  knowledge  of  the  soul
beyond  the  conception  of  the  body—not  theoretically  but  practically,  when
there  is  no  longer  a  chance  for  sense  gratification  manifested  in  fruitive
activities. One who is not firmly fixed in mind is diverted by various types of
fruitive acts.

TEXTS

 42–43

YaaiMaMaa& PauiZPaTaa& vac& Pa[vdNTYaivPaiêTa" )

vedvadrTaa" PaaQaR NaaNYadSTaqiTa vaidNa" )) 42 ))

k-aMaaTMaaNa" SvGaRPara JaNMak-MaRf-l/Pa[daMa( )

i§-YaaivXaezbhul/a& >aaeGaEìYaRGaiTa& Pa[iTa )) 43 ))

yäm imäà puñpitäà väcaà
pravadanty avipaçcitaù
veda-väda-ratäù pärtha
nänyad astéti vädinaù

kämätmänaù svarga-parä
janma-karma-phala-pradäm
kriyä-viçeña-bahuläà
bhogaiçvarya-gatià prati

SYNONYMS

yäm imäm—all these; puñpitäm—flowery; väcam—words; pravadanti—say;
avipaçcitaù—men with a poor fund of knowledge; veda-väda-ratäù—supposed
followers of the Vedas; pärtha—O son of Påthä; na—never; anyat—anything
else; asti—there is; iti—thus; vädinaù—the advocates;
käma-ätmänaù—desirous of sense gratification; svarga-paräù—aiming to
achieve heavenly planets; janma-karma-phala-pradäm—resulting in good birth

and other fruitive reactions; kriyä-viçeña—pompous ceremonies;
bahuläm—various; bhoga—in sense enjoyment; aiçvarya—and opulence;
gatim—progress; prati—towards.

TRANSLATION

Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the

Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly
planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being desirous of sense
gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this.

PURPORT

People in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance they
are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in the karma-käëòa
portions  of  the  Vedas.  They  do  not  want  anything  more  than  sense
gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wine and women are
available and material opulence is very common. In the Vedas many sacrifices
are  recommended  for  elevation  to  the  heavenly  planets,  especially  the
jyotiñöoma  sacrifices.  In  fact,  it  is  stated  that  anyone  desiring  elevation  to
heavenly  planets  must  perform  these  sacrifices,  and  men  with  a  poor  fund  of
knowledge  think  that  this  is  the  whole  purpose  of  Vedic  wisdom.  It  is  very
difficult  for  such  inexperienced  persons  to  be  situated  in  the  determined
action  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  As  fools  are  attached  to  the  flowers  of
poisonous trees without knowing the results of such attractions, unenlightened
men  are  similarly  attracted  by  such  heavenly  opulence  and  the  sense
enjoyment thereof.

In  the  karma-käëòa  section  of  the  Vedas  it  is  said,  apäma  somam  amåtä
abhüma  and  akñayyaà  ha  vai  cäturmasya-yäjinaù  sukåtaà  bhavati.  In  other
words,  those  who  perform  the  four-month  penances  become  eligible  to  drink
the soma-rasa beverages to become immortal and happy forever. Even on this
earth some are very eager to have soma-rasa to become strong and fit to enjoy
sense  gratifications.  Such  persons  have  no  faith  in  liberation  from  material
bondage,  and  they  are  very  much  attached  to  the  pompous  ceremonies  of

Vedic  sacrifices.  They  are  generally  sensual,  and  they  do  not  want  anything
other  than  the  heavenly  pleasures  of  life.  It  is  understood  that  there  are
gardens  called  Nandana-känana  in  which  there  is  good  opportunity  for
association  with  angelic,  beautiful  women  and  having  a  profuse  supply  of
soma-rasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainly sensual; therefore there are
those who are purely attached to such material, temporary happiness, as lords
of the material world.

TEXT  44

>aaeGaEìYaRPa[Sa¢-aNaa& TaYaaPaôTaceTaSaaMa( )

VYavSaaYaaiTMak-a buiÖ" SaMaaDaaE Na ivDaqYaTae )) 44 ))

bhogaiçvarya-prasaktänäà
tayäpahåta-cetasäm
vyavasäyätmikä buddhiù
samädhau na vidhéyate

SYNONYMS

bhoga—to material enjoyment; aiçvarya—and opulence; prasaktänäm—for
those who are attached; tayä—by such things; apahåta-cetasäm—bewildered in
mind; vyavasäya-ätmikä—fixed in determination; buddhiù—devotional service
to the Lord; samädhau—in the controlled mind; na—never; vidhéyate—does
take place.

TRANSLATION

In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material
opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination for
devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place.

PURPORT

Samädhi  means  “fixed  mind.”  The  Vedic  dictionary,  the  Nirukti,  says,
samyag ädhéyate ’sminn ätma-tattva-yäthätmyam: “When the mind is fixed for
understanding the self, it is said to be in samädhi. ” Samädhi is never possible
for  persons  interested  in  material  sense  enjoyment,  nor  for  those  who  are
bewildered by such temporary things. They are more or less condemned by the
process of material energy.

TEXT  45

}aEGau<YaivzYaa veda iNañEGau<Yaae >avaJauRNa )

iNaÜRNÜae iNaTYaSatvSQaae iNaYaaeRGa+aeMa AaTMavaNa( )) 45 ))

trai-guëya-viñayä vedä
nistrai-guëyo bhavärjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-kñema ätmavän

SYNONYMS

trai-guëya—pertaining to the three modes of material nature; viñayäù—on the
subject matter; vedäù—Vedic literatures; nistrai-guëyaù—transcendental to
the three modes of material nature; bhava—be; arjuna—O Arjuna;
nirdvandvaù—without duality; nitya-sattva-sthaù—in a pure state of spiritual
existence; niryoga-kñemaù—free from ideas of gain and protection;
ätma-vän—established in the self.

TRANSLATION

The Vedas deal mainly with the subject of the three modes of material

nature. O Arjuna, become transcendental to these three modes. Be free from all
dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established in the
self.

PURPORT

All material activities involve actions and reactions in the three modes of
material  nature.  They  are  meant  for  fruitive  results,  which  cause  bondage  in
the material world. The Vedas deal mostly with fruitive activities to gradually
elevate the general public from the field of sense gratification to a position on
the  transcendental  plane.  Arjuna,  as  a  student  and  friend  of  Lord  Kåñëa,  is
advised to raise himself to the transcendental position of Vedänta philosophy
where, in the beginning, there is brahma-jijïäsä, or questions on the supreme
transcendence.  All  the  living  entities  who  are  in  the  material  world  are
struggling  very  hard  for  existence.  For  them  the  Lord,  after  creation  of  the
material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how to live and get rid of the
material entanglement. When the activities for sense gratification, namely the
karma-käëòa chapter, are finished, then the chance for spiritual realization is
offered in the form of the Upaniñads, which are part of different Vedas, as the
Bhagavad-gétä  is  a  part  of  the  fifth  Veda,  namely  the  Mahäbhärata.  The
Upaniñads mark the beginning of transcendental life.

As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions in the
material  modes.  One  has  to  learn  tolerance  in  the  face  of  dualities  such  as
happiness  and  distress,  or  cold  and  warmth,  and  by  tolerating  such  dualities
become  free  from  anxieties  regarding  gain  and  loss.  This  transcendental
position  is  achieved  in  full  Kåñëa  consciousness  when  one  is  fully  dependent
on the good will of Kåñëa.

TEXT  46

YaavaNaQaR odPaaNae SavRTa" SaMPl/uTaaedke- )

TaavaNSaveRzu vedezu b]aø<aSYa ivJaaNaTa" )) 46 ))

yävän artha udapäne
sarvataù samplutodake
tävän sarveñu vedeñu

brähmaëasya vijänataù

SYNONYMS

yävän—all that; arthaù—is meant; uda-päne—in a well of water; sarvataù—in
all respects; sampluta-udake—in a great reservoir of water; tävän—similarly;
sarveñu—in all; vedeñu—Vedic literatures; brähmaëasya—of the man who
knows the Supreme Brahman; vijänataù—who is in complete knowledge.

TRANSLATION

All purposes served by a small well can at once be served by a great reservoir

of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedas can be served to one who
knows the purpose behind them.

PURPORT

literature  are  meant 

The  rituals  and  sacrifices  mentioned  in  the  karma-käëòa  division  of  the
Vedic 
to  encourage  gradual  development  of
self-realization.  And  the  purpose  of  self-realization  is  clearly  stated  in  the
Fifteenth  Chapter  of  the Bhagavad-gétä  (15.15):  the  purpose  of  studying  the
Vedas  is  to  know  Lord  Kåñëa,  the  primeval  cause  of  everything.  So,
self-realization means understanding Kåñëa and one’s eternal relationship with
Him.  The  relationship  of  the  living  entities  with  Kåñëa  is  also  mentioned  in
the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä (15.7). The living entities are parts and
parcels  of  Kåñëa;  therefore,  revival  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  by  the  individual
living  entity  is  the  highest  perfectional  stage  of  Vedic  knowledge.  This  is
confirmed in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.33.7) as follows:

aho bata çva-paco ’to garéyän
yaj-jihvägre vartate näma tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuù sasnur äryä
brahmänücur näma gåëanti ye te

“O my Lord, a person who is chanting Your holy name, although born of a

low family like that of a caëòäla [dog-eater], is situated on the highest platform
of  self-realization.  Such  a  person  must  have  performed  all  kinds  of  penances
and  sacrifices  according  to  Vedic  rituals  and  studied  the  Vedic  literatures
many,  many  times  after  taking  his  bath  in  all  the  holy  places  of  pilgrimage.
Such a person is considered to be the best of the Äryan family.

So one must be intelligent enough to understand the purpose of the Vedas,
without being attached to the rituals only, and must not desire to be elevated
to  the  heavenly  kingdoms  for  a  better  quality  of  sense  gratification.  It  is  not
possible for the common man in this age to follow all the rules and regulations
of  the  Vedic  rituals,  nor  is  it  possible  to  study  all  of  the  Vedänta  and  the
Upaniñads thoroughly. It requires much time, energy, knowledge and resources
to  execute  the  purposes  of  the  Vedas.  This  is  hardly  possible  in  this  age.  The
best purpose of Vedic culture is served, however, by chanting the holy name of
the Lord, as recommended by Lord Caitanya, the deliverer of all fallen souls.
When  Lord  Caitanya  was  asked  by  a  great  Vedic  scholar,  Prakäçänanda
Sarasvaté,  why  He,  the  Lord,  was  chanting  the  holy  name  of  the  Lord  like  a
sentimentalist  instead  of  studying  Vedänta  philosophy,  the  Lord  replied  that
His spiritual master had found Him to be a great fool and thus asked Him to
chant  the  holy  name  of  Lord  Kåñëa.  He  did  so,  and  became  ecstatic  like  a
madman.  In  this  Age  of  Kali,  most  of  the  population  is  foolish  and  not
adequately  educated  to  understand  Vedänta  philosophy;  the  best  purpose  of
Vedänta  philosophy  is  served  by  inoffensively  chanting  the  holy  name  of  the
Lord. Vedänta is the last word in Vedic wisdom, and the author and knower of
the Vedänta philosophy is Lord Kåñëa; and the highest Vedäntist is the great
soul  who  takes  pleasure  in  chanting  the  holy  name  of  the  Lord.  That  is  the
ultimate purpose of all Vedic mysticism.

TEXT  47

k-MaR<YaevaiDak-arSTae Maa f-le/zu k-dacNa )

Maa k-MaRf-l/heTau>aURMaaR Tae Sa®ae_STvk-MaRi<a )) 47 ))

karmaëy evädhikäras te

mä phaleñu kadäcana
mä karma-phala-hetur bhür
mä te saìgo ’stv akarmaëi

SYNONYMS

karmaëi—in prescribed duties; eva—certainly; adhikäraù—right; te—of you;
mä—never; phaleñu—in the fruits; kadäcana—at any time; mä—never;
karma-phala—in the result of the work; hetuù—cause; bhüù—become;
mä—never; te—of you; saìgaù—attachment; astu—there should be;
akarmaëi—in not doing prescribed duties.

TRANSLATION

You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to

the fruits of action. Never consider yourself the cause of the results of your
activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty.

PURPORT

There are three considerations here: prescribed duties, capricious work, and
inaction.  Prescribed  duties  are  activities  enjoined  in  terms  of  one’s  acquired
modes of material nature. Capricious work means actions without the sanction
of authority, and inaction means not performing one’s prescribed duties. The
Lord advised that Arjuna not be inactive, but that he perform his prescribed
duty without being attached to the result. One who is attached to the result of
his  work  is  also  the  cause  of  the  action.  Thus he is the enjoyer or sufferer of
the result of such actions.

As  far  as  prescribed  duties  are  concerned,  they  can  be  fitted  into  three
subdivisions,  namely  routine  work,  emergency  work  and  desired  activities.
Routine  work  performed  as  an  obligation  in  terms  of  the  scriptural
injunctions, without desire for results, is action in the mode of goodness. Work
with  results  becomes  the  cause  of  bondage;  therefore  such  work  is  not
auspicious.  Everyone  has  his  proprietary  right  in  regard  to  prescribed  duties,

but should act without attachment to the result; such disinterested obligatory
duties doubtlessly lead one to the path of liberation.

Arjuna  was  therefore  advised  by  the  Lord  to  fight  as  a  matter  of  duty
without attachment to the result. His nonparticipation in the battle is another
side of attachment. Such attachment never leads one to the path of salvation.
Any attachment, positive or negative, is cause for bondage. Inaction is sinful.
Therefore,  fighting  as  a  matter  of  duty  was  the  only  auspicious  path  of
salvation for Arjuna.

TEXT  48

YaaeGaSQa" ku-å k-MaaRi<a Sa®& TYa¤-a DaNaÅYa )

iSaÖyiSaÖyae" SaMaae >aUTva SaMaTv& YaaeGa oCYaTae )) 48 ))

yoga-sthaù kuru karmäëi
saìgaà tyaktvä dhanaïjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoù samo bhütvä
samatvaà yoga ucyate

SYNONYMS

yoga-sthaù—equipoised; kuru—perform; karmäëi—your duties;
saìgam—attachment; tyaktvä—giving up; dhanaïjaya—O Arjuna;
siddhi-asiddhyoù—in success and failure; samaù—equipoised;
bhütvä—becoming; samatvam—equanimity; yogaù—yoga; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

Perform your duty equipoised, O Arjuna, abandoning all attachment to

success or failure. Such equanimity is called yoga.

PURPORT

Kåñëa tells Arjuna that he should act in yoga. And what is that yoga? Yoga

means  to  concentrate  the  mind  upon  the  Supreme  by  controlling  the
ever-disturbing  senses.  And  who  is  the  Supreme?  The  Supreme  is  the  Lord.
And because He Himself is telling Arjuna to fight, Arjuna has nothing to do
with  the  results  of  the  fight.  Gain  or  victory  are  Kåñëa’s  concern;  Arjuna  is
simply  advised  to  act  according  to  the  dictation  of  Kåñëa.  The  following  of
Kåñëa’s dictation is real yoga, and this is practiced in the process called Kåñëa
consciousness.  By  Kåñëa  consciousness  only  can  one  give  up  the  sense  of
proprietorship. One has to become the servant of Kåñëa, or the servant of the
servant  of  Kåñëa.  That  is  the  right  way  to  discharge  duty  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, which alone can help one to act in yoga.

Arjuna 

such  he 

is  a  kñatriya,  and  as 

the
varëäçrama-dharma  institution.  It  is  said  in  the  Viñëu  Puräëa  that  in  the
varëäçrama-dharma,  the  whole  aim  is  to  satisfy  Viñëu.  No  one  should  satisfy
himself,  as  is  the  rule  in  the  material  world, but one should satisfy Kåñëa. So
unless  one  satisfies  Kåñëa,  one  cannot  correctly  observe  the  principles  of
varëäçrama-dharma. Indirectly, Arjuna was advised to act as Kåñëa told him.

is  participating 

in 

TEXT  49

dUre<a ùvr& k-MaR buiÖYaaeGaaÖNaÅYa )

buÖaE Xar<aMaiNvC^ k*-Pa<aa" f-l/heTav" )) 49 ))

düreëa hy avaraà karma
buddhi-yogäd dhanaïjaya
buddhau çaraëam anviccha
kåpaëäù phala-hetavaù

SYNONYMS

düreëa—discard it at a long distance; hi—certainly; avaram—abominable;
karma—activity; buddhi-yogät—on the strength of Kåñëa consciousness;
dhanaïjaya—O conqueror of wealth; buddhau—in such consciousness;
çaraëam—full surrender; anviccha—try for; kåpaëäù—misers;

phala-hetavaù—those desiring fruitive results.

TRANSLATION

O Dhanaïjaya, keep all abominable activities far distant by devotional

service, and in that consciousness surrender unto the Lord. Those who want to
enjoy the fruits of their work are misers.

PURPORT

One  who  has  actually  come  to  understand  one’s  constitutional  position  as
an eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save working in Kåñëa
consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means transcendental loving
service  to  the  Lord.  Such  devotional  service  is  the  right  course  of  action  for
the living entity. Only misers desire to enjoy the fruit of their own work just to
be  further  entangled  in  material  bondage.  Except  for  work  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, all activities are abominable because they continually bind the
worker to the cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to be
the cause of work. Everything should be done in Kåñëa consciousness, for the
satisfaction  of  Kåñëa.  Misers  do  not  know  how  to  utilize  the  assets  of  riches
which  they  acquire  by  good  fortune  or  by  hard  labor.  One  should  spend  all
energies  working  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  and  that  will  make  one’s  life
successful. Like misers, unfortunate persons do not employ their human energy
in the service of the Lord.

TEXT  50

buiÖYau¢-ae JahaTaqh o>ae Sauk*-TaduZk*-Tae )

TaSMaaÛaeGaaYa YauJYaSv YaaeGa" k-MaRSau k-aEXal/Ma( )) 50 ))

buddhi-yukto jahätéha
ubhe sukåta-duñkåte
tasmäd yogäya yujyasva
yogaù karmasu kauçalam

SYNONYMS

buddhi-yuktaù—one who is engaged in devotional service; jahäti—can get rid
of; iha—in this life; ubhe—both; sukåta-duñkåte—good and bad results;
tasmät—therefore; yogäya—for the sake of devotional service; yujyasva—be so
engaged; yogaù—Kåñëa consciousness; karmasu—in all activities;
kauçalam—art.

TRANSLATION

A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad
actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, which is the art of all work.

PURPORT

Since  time  immemorial  each  living  entity  has  accumulated  the  various
reactions of his good and bad work. As such, he is continuously ignorant of his
real  constitutional  position.  One’s  ignorance  can  be  removed  by  the
instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä, which teaches one to surrender unto Lord Çré
Kåñëa  in  all  respects  and  become  liberated  from  the  chained  victimization  of
action  and  reaction,  birth  after  birth.  Arjuna  is  therefore  advised  to  act  in
Kåñëa consciousness, the purifying process of resultant action.

TEXT  51

k-MaRJa& buiÖYau¢-a ih f-l&/ TYa¤-a MaNaqiz<a" )

JaNMabNDaiviNaMauR¢-a" Pad& GaC^NTYaNaaMaYaMa( )) 51 ))

karma-jaà buddhi-yuktä hi
phalaà tyaktvä manéñiëaù
janma-bandha-vinirmuktäù
padaà gacchanty anämayam

SYNONYMS

karma-jam—due to fruitive activities; buddhi-yuktäù—being engaged in
devotional service; hi—certainly; phalam—results; tyaktvä—giving up;
manéñiëaù—great sages or devotees; janma-bandha—from the bondage of birth
and death; vinirmuktäù—liberated; padam—position; gacchanti—they reach;
anämayam—without miseries.

TRANSLATION

By thus engaging in devotional service to the Lord, great sages or devotees
free themselves from the results of work in the material world. In this way they
become free from the cycle of birth and death and attain the state beyond all
miseries [by going back to Godhead].

PURPORT

The  liberated  living  entities  belong  to  that  place  where  there  are  no

material miseries. The Bhägavatam (10.14.58) says:

samäñritä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù
bhavämbudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm

“For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the
shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda, or the giver of
mukti,  the  ocean  of  the  material  world  is  like  the  water  contained  in  a  calf’s
footprint. paraà padam, or the place where there are no material miseries, or
Vaikuëöha,  is  his  goal,  not  the  place  where  there  is  danger  in  every  step  of
life.”

Owing  to  ignorance,  one  does  not  know  that  this  material  world  is  a
miserable place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignorance only,
less  intelligent  persons  try  to  adjust  to  the  situation  by  fruitive  activities,

thinking that the resultant actions will make them happy. They do not know
that  no  kind  of  material  body  anywhere  within  the  universe  can  give  life
without miseries. The miseries of life, namely birth, death, old age and diseases,
are  present  everywhere  within  the  material  world.  But  one  who  understands
his  real  constitutional  position  as  the  eternal  servitor  of  the  Lord,  and  thus
knows  the  position  of  the  Personality  of  Godhead,  engages  himself  in  the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomes qualified
to enter into the Vaikuëöha planets, where there is neither material, miserable
life nor the influence of time and death. To know one’s constitutional position
means to know also the sublime position of the Lord. One who wrongly thinks
that the living entity’s position and the Lord’s position are on the same level is
to be understood to be in darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in
the devotional service of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves
the way for the repetition of birth and death. But one who, understanding that
his  position  is  to  serve,  transfers  himself  to  the  service  of  the  Lord,  at  once
becomes eligible for Vaikuëöhaloka. Service for the cause of the Lord is called
karma-yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words, devotional service to the Lord.

TEXT  52

Yada Tae Maaehk-il/l&/ buiÖVYaRiTaTairZYaiTa )

Tada GaNTaaiSa iNaveRd& é[aeTaVYaSYa é[uTaSYa c )) 52 ))

yadä te moha-kalilaà
buddhir vyatitariñyati
tadä gantäsi nirvedaà
çrotavyasya çrutasya ca

SYNONYMS

yadä—when; te—your; moha—of illusion; kalilam—dense forest;
buddhiù—transcendental service with intelligence; vyatitariñyati—surpasses;
tadä—at that time; gantä asi—you shall go; nirvedam—callousness;

çrotavyasya—toward all that is to be heard; çrutasya—all that is already heard;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

When your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion, you
shall become indifferent to all that has been heard and all that is to be heard.

PURPORT

There are many good examples in the lives of the great devotees of the Lord
of  those  who  became  indifferent  to  the  rituals  of  the  Vedas  simply  by
devotional  service  to  the  Lord.  When  a  person  factually  understands  Kåñëa
and  his  relationship  with  Kåñëa,  he  naturally becomes completely indifferent
to the rituals of fruitive activities, even though an experienced brähmaëa. Çré
Mädhavendra Puré, a great devotee and äcärya in the line of the devotees, says:

sandhyä-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoù snäna tubhyaà namo
bho deväù pitaraç ca tarpaëa-vidhau nähaà kñamaù kñamyatäm
yatra kväpi niñadya yädava-kulottamasya kaàsa-dviñaù
smäraà smäram aghaà harämi tad alaà manye kim anyena me

“O  my  prayers  three  times  a  day,  all  glory  to  you.  O  bathing,  I  offer  my
obeisances  unto  you.  O  demigods!  O  forefathers!  Please  excuse  me  for  my
inability  to  offer  you  my  respects.  Now  wherever  I  sit,  I  can  remember  the
great  descendant  of  the  Yadu  dynasty  [Kåñëa],  the  enemy  of  Kaàsa,  and
thereby I can free myself from all sinful bondage. I think this is sufficient for
me.”

The Vedic rites and rituals are imperative for neophytes: comprehending all
kinds of prayer three times a day, taking a bath early in the morning, offering
respects  to  the  forefathers,  etc.  But  when  one  is  fully  in  Kåñëa  consciousness
and is engaged in His transcendental loving service, one becomes indifferent
to all these regulative principles because he has already attained perfection. If
one can reach the platform of understanding by service to the Supreme Lord
Kåñëa, he has no longer to execute different types of penances and sacrifices as

recommended in revealed scriptures. And, similarly, if one has not understood
that  the  purpose  of  the  Vedas  is  to  reach  Kåñëa  and  simply  engages  in  the
rituals, etc., then he is uselessly wasting time in such engagements. Persons in
Kåñëa consciousness transcend the limit of çabda-brahma, or the range of the
Vedas and Upaniñads.

TEXT  53

é[uiTaivPa[iTaPaàa Tae Yada SQaaSYaiTa iNaêl/a )

SaMaaDaavcl/a buiÖSTada YaaeGaMavaPSYaiSa )) 53 ))

çruti-vipratipannä te
yadä sthäsyati niçcalä
samädhäv acalä buddhis
tadä yogam aväpsyasi

SYNONYMS

çruti—of Vedic revelation; vipratipannä—without being influenced by the
fruitive results; te—your; yadä—when; sthäsyati—remains; niçcalä—unmoved;
samädhau—in transcendental consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness;
acalä—unflinching; buddhiù—intelligence; tadä—at that time;
yogam—self-realization; aväpsyasi—you will achieve.

TRANSLATION

When your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the

Vedas, and when it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization, then you will
have attained the divine consciousness.

PURPORT

To  say  that  one  is  in  samädhi  is  to  say  that  one  has  fully  realized  Kåñëa
consciousness;  that  is,  one  in  full  samädhi  has  realized  Brahman,  Paramätmä

and Bhagavän. The highest perfection of self-realization is to understand that
one  is  eternally  the  servitor  of  Kåñëa  and  that  one’s  only  business  is  to
discharge  one’s  duties  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  A  Kåñëa  conscious  person,  or
unflinching  devotee  of  the  Lord,  should  not  be  disturbed  by  the  flowery
language of the Vedas nor be engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the
into
heavenly  kingdom.  In  Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  comes  directly 
communion with Kåñëa, and thus all directions from Kåñëa may be understood
in  that  transcendental  state.  One  is  sure  to  achieve  results  by  such  activities
and  attain  conclusive  knowledge.  One  has  only  to  carry  out  the  orders  of
Kåñëa or His representative, the spiritual master.

TEXT  54

AJauRNa ovac

iSQaTaPa[jSYa k-a >aaza SaMaaiDaSQaSYa ke-Xav )

iSQaTaDaq" ik&- Pa[>aazeTa ik-MaaSaqTa v]JaeTa ik-Ma( )) 54 ))

arjuna uväca
sthita-prajïasya kä bhäñä
samädhi-sthasya keçava
sthita-dhéù kià prabhäñeta
kim äséta vrajeta kim

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; sthita-prajïasya—of one who is situated in fixed
Kåñëa consciousness; kä—what; bhäñä—language; samädhi-sthasya—of one
situated in trance; keçava—O Kåñëa; sthita-dhéù—one fixed in Kåñëa
consciousness; kim—what; prabhäñeta—speaks; kim—how; äséta—does remain
still; vrajeta—walks; kim—how.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Kåñëa, what are the symptoms of one whose consciousness is

thus merged in transcendence? How does he speak, and what is his language?
How does he sit, and how does he walk?

PURPORT

As  there  are  symptoms  for  each  and  every  man,  in  terms  of  his  particular
situation,  similarly  one  who 
is  Kåñëa  conscious  has  his  particular
nature—talking,  walking,  thinking,  feeling,  etc.  As  a  rich  man  has  his
symptoms  by  which  he  is  known  as  a  rich  man,  as  a  diseased  man  has  his
symptoms  by  which  he  is  known  as  diseased,  or  as  a  learned  man  has  his
symptoms,  so  a  man  in  transcendental  consciousness  of  Kåñëa  has  specific
symptoms  in  various  dealings.  One  can  know  his  specific  symptoms  from  the
Bhagavad-gétä. Most important is how the man in Kåñëa consciousness speaks;
for  speech  is  the  most  important  quality  of  any  man.  It  is  said  that  a  fool  is
undiscovered  as  long  as  he  does  not  speak,  and  certainly  a  well-dressed  fool
cannot  be  identified  unless  he  speaks,  but  as  soon  as  he  speaks,  he  reveals
himself at once. The immediate symptom of a Kåñëa conscious man is that he
speaks  only  of  Kåñëa  and  of  matters  relating  to  Him.  Other  symptoms  then
automatically follow, as stated below.

TEXT  55

é[q>aGavaNauvac

Pa[JahaiTa Yada k-aMaaNSavaRNPaaQaR MaNaaeGaTaaNa( )

AaTMaNYaevaTMaNaa Tauí" iSQaTaPa[jSTadaeCYaTae )) 55 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
prajahäti yadä kämän
sarvän pärtha mano-gatän
ätmany evätmanä tuñöaù
sthita-prajïas tadocyate

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
prajahäti—gives up; yadä—when; kämän—desires for sense gratification;
sarvän—of all varieties; pärtha—O son of Påthä; manaù-gatän—of mental
concoction; ätmani—in the pure state of the soul; eva—certainly; ätmanä—by
the purified mind; tuñöaù—satisfied; sthita-prajïaù—transcendentally situated;
tadä—at that time; ucyate—is said.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Pärtha, when a man gives up

all varieties of desire for sense gratification, which arise from mental
concoction, and when his mind, thus purified, finds satisfaction in the self
alone, then he is said to be in pure transcendental consciousness.

PURPORT

is  fully 

The  Bhägavatam  affirms  that  any  person  who 

in  Kåñëa
consciousness,  or  devotional  service  of  the  Lord,  has  all  the  good  qualities  of
the  great  sages,  whereas  a  person  who  is  not  so  transcendentally  situated  has
no good qualifications, because he is sure to be taking refuge in his own mental
concoctions. Consequently, it is rightly said herein that one has to give up all
kinds  of  sense  desire  manufactured  by  mental  concoction.  Artificially,  such
sense desires cannot be stopped. But if one is engaged in Kåñëa consciousness,
then,  automatically,  sense  desires  subside  without  extraneous  efforts.
Therefore,  one  has  to  engage  himself  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  without
hesitation, for this devotional service will instantly help one onto the platform
of  transcendental  consciousness.  The  highly  developed  soul  always  remains
satisfied in himself by realizing himself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme
Lord.  Such  a  transcendentally  situated  person  has  no  sense  desires  resulting
from petty materialism; rather, he remains always happy in his natural position
of eternally serving the Supreme Lord.

TEXT  56

du"%eZvNauiÜGanMaNaa" Sau%ezu ivGaTaSPa*h" )

vqTaraGa>aYa§-aeDa" iSQaTaDaqMauRiNaåCYaTae )) 56 ))

duùkheñv anudvigna-manäù
sukheñu vigata-spåhaù
véta-räga-bhaya-krodhaù
sthita-dhér munir ucyate

SYNONYMS

duùkheñu—in the threefold miseries; anudvigna-manäù—without being
agitated in mind; sukheñu—in happiness; vigata-spåhaù—without being
interested; véta—free from; räga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhaù—and
anger; sthita-dhéù—whose mind is steady; muniù—a sage; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

One who is not disturbed in mind even amidst the threefold miseries or
elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear and
anger, is called a sage of steady mind.

PURPORT

The  word  muni  means  one  who  can  agitate  his  mind  in  various  ways  for
mental speculation without coming to a factual conclusion. It is said that every
muni  has  a  different  angle  of  vision,  and  unless  a  muni  differs  from  other
munis,  he  cannot  be  called  a  muni  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term.  Näsäv  åñir
yasya mataà na bhinnam (Mahäbhärata, Vana-parva 313.117). But a sthita-dhér
muni,  as  mentioned  herein  by  the  Lord,  is  different  from  an  ordinary  muni.
The sthita-dhér muni is always in Kåñëa consciousness, for he has exhausted all
called
his 

speculation. 

business 

creative 

He 

of 

is 

praçänta-niùçeña-mano-rathäntara  (Stotra-ratna  43), or one who has surpassed
the stage of mental speculations and has come to the conclusion that Lord Çré
iti  sa  mahätmä
Kåñëa,  or  Väsudeva,  is  everything  (väsudevaù  sarvam 
su-durlabhaù). He is called a muni fixed in mind. Such a fully Kåñëa conscious
person is not at all disturbed by the onslaughts of the threefold miseries, for he
accepts all miseries as the mercy of the Lord, thinking himself only worthy of
more  trouble  due  to  his  past  misdeeds;  and  he  sees  that  his  miseries,  by  the
grace of the Lord, are minimized to the lowest. Similarly, when he is happy he
gives  credit  to  the  Lord,  thinking  himself  unworthy  of  the  happiness;  he
realizes that it is due only to the Lord’s grace that he is in such a comfortable
condition and able to render better service to the Lord. And, for the service of
the Lord, he is always daring and active and is not influenced by attachment
or  aversion.  Attachment  means  accepting  things  for  one’s  own  sense
gratification, and detachment is the absence of such sensual attachment. But
one  fixed  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  has  neither  attachment  nor  detachment
because his life is dedicated in the service of the Lord. Consequently he is not
at all angry even when his attempts are unsuccessful. Success or no success, a
Kåñëa conscious person is always steady in his determination.

TEXT  57

Ya" SavR}aaNai>aòehSTataTPa[aPYa éu>aaéu>aMa( )

Naai>aNaNdiTa Na Üeií TaSYa Pa[ja Pa[iTaiïTaa )) 57 ))

yaù sarvatränabhisnehas
tat tat präpya çubhäçubham
näbhinandati na dveñöi
tasya prajïä pratiñöhitä

SYNONYMS

yaù—one who; sarvatra—everywhere; anabhisnehaù—without affection;
tat—that; tat—that; präpya—achieving; çubha—good; açubham—evil;

na—never; abhinandati—praises; na—never; dveñöi—envies; tasya—his;
prajïä—perfect knowledge; pratiñöhitä—fixed.

TRANSLATION

In the material world, one who is unaffected by whatever good or evil he

may obtain, neither praising it nor despising it, is firmly fixed in perfect
knowledge.

PURPORT

There is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good or
evil. One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who is unaffected by
good and evil, is to be understood to be fixed in Kåñëa consciousness. As long
as one is in the material world there is always the possibility of good and evil
because  this  world  is  full  of  duality.  But  one  who  is  fixed  in  Kåñëa
consciousness is not affected by good and evil, because he is simply concerned
with Kåñëa, who is all-good absolute. Such consciousness in Kåñëa situates one
in a perfect transcendental position called, technically, samädhi.

TEXT  58

Yada Sa&hrTae caYa& kU-MaaeR_®aNaqv SavRXa" )

wiNd]Yaa<aqiNd]YaaQaeR>YaSTaSYa Pa[ja Pa[iTaiïTaa )) 58 ))

yadä saàharate cäyaà
kürmo ’ìgänéva sarvaçaù
indriyäëéndriyärthebhyas
tasya prajïä pratiñöhitä

SYNONYMS

yadä—when; saàharate—winds up; ca—also; ayam—he; kürmaù—tortoise;
aìgäni—limbs; iva—like; sarvaçaù—altogether; indriyäëi—senses;

indriya-arthebhyaù—from the sense objects; tasya—his;
prajïä—consciousness; pratiñöhitä—fixed.

TRANSLATION

One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the tortoise

draws its limbs within the shell, is firmly fixed in perfect consciousness.

PURPORT

The test of a yogé, devotee, or self-realized soul is that he is able to control
the  senses  according  to  his  plan.  Most  people,  however,  are  servants  of  the
senses and are thus directed by the dictation of the senses. That is the answer
to  the  question  as  to  how  the  yogé  is  situated.  The  senses  are  compared  to
venomous serpents. They want to act very loosely and without restriction. The
yogé, or the devotee, must be very strong to control the serpents—like a snake
charmer.  He  never  allows  them  to  act  independently.  There  are  many
injunctions in the revealed scriptures; some of them are do-not’s, and some of
them are do’s. Unless one is able to follow the do’s and the do-not’s, restricting
oneself  from  sense  enjoyment,  it  is  not  possible  to  be  firmly  fixed  in  Kåñëa
consciousness. The best example, set herein, is the tortoise. The tortoise can at
any  moment  wind  up  his  senses  and  exhibit  them  again  at  any  time  for
particular  purposes.  Similarly,  the  senses  of  the  Kåñëa  conscious  persons  are
used  only  for  some  particular  purpose  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  and  are
withdrawn  otherwise.  Arjuna  is  being  taught  here  to  use  his  senses  for  the
service  of  the  Lord,  instead  of  for  his  own  satisfaction.  Keeping  the  senses
always  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  is  the  example  set  by  the  analogy  of  the
tortoise, who keeps the senses within.

TEXT  59

ivzYaa iviNavTaRNTae iNaraharSYa deihNa" )

rSavJa| rSaae_PYaSYa Par& d*îa iNavTaRTae )) 59 ))

viñayä vinivartante
nirähärasya dehinaù
rasa-varjaà raso ’py asya
paraà dåñövä nivartate

SYNONYMS

viñayäù—objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante—are practiced to be
refrained from; nirähärasya—by negative restrictions; dehinaù—for the
embodied; rasa-varjam—giving up the taste; rasaù—sense of enjoyment;
api—although there is; asya—his; param—far superior things; dåñövä—by
experiencing; nivartate—he ceases from.

TRANSLATION

The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the taste

for sense objects remains. But, ceasing such engagements by experiencing a
higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.

PURPORT

Unless  one  is  transcendentally  situated,  it  is  not  possible  to  cease  from
sense enjoyment. The process of restriction from sense enjoyment by rules and
regulations is something like restricting a diseased person from certain types of
eatables.  The  patient,  however,  neither  likes  such  restrictions  nor  loses  his
taste  for  eatables.  Similarly,  sense  restriction  by  some  spiritual  process  like
añöäìga-yoga,  in  the  matter  of  yama,  niyama,  äsana,  präëäyäma,  pratyähära,
dhäraëä, dhyäna, etc., is recommended for less intelligent persons who have no
better  knowledge.  But  one  who  has  tasted  the  beauty  of  the  Supreme  Lord
Kåñëa, in the course of his advancement in Kåñëa consciousness, no longer has
a taste for dead, material things. Therefore, restrictions are there for the less
intelligent neophytes in the spiritual advancement of life, but such restrictions
are only good until one actually has a taste for Kåñëa consciousness. When one
is actually Kåñëa conscious, he automatically loses his taste for pale things.

TEXT  60

YaTaTaae ùiPa k-aENTaeYa PauåzSYa ivPaiêTa" )

wiNd]Yaai<a Pa[MaaQaqiNa hriNTa Pa[Sa>a& MaNa" )) 60 ))

yatato hy api kaunteya
puruñasya vipaçcitaù
indriyäëi pramäthéni
haranti prasabhaà manaù

SYNONYMS

yatataù—while endeavoring; hi—certainly; api—in spite of; kaunteya—O son
of Kunté; puruñasya—of a man; vipaçcitaù—full of discriminating knowledge;
indriyäëi—the senses; pramäthéni—agitating; haranti—throw; prasabham—by
force; manaù—the mind.

TRANSLATION

The senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they forcibly carry
away the mind even of a man of discrimination who is endeavoring to control
them.

PURPORT

There are many learned sages, philosophers and transcendentalists who try
to  conquer  the  senses,  but  in  spite  of  their  endeavors,  even  the  greatest  of
them  sometimes  fall  victim  to  material  sense  enjoyment  due  to  the  agitated
mind.  Even  Viçvämitra,  a  great  sage  and  perfect  yogé,  was  misled  by  Menakä
into sex enjoyment, although the yogé was endeavoring for sense control with
severe types of penance and yoga practice. And, of course, there are so many
similar  instances  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Therefore,  it  is  very  difficult  to
control  the  mind  and  senses  without  being  fully  Kåñëa  conscious.  Without

engaging the mind in Kåñëa, one cannot cease such material engagements. A
practical example is given by Çré Yämunäcärya, a great saint and devotee, who
says:

yad-avadhi mama cetaù kåñëa-pädäravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhämany udyataà rantum äsét
tad-avadhi bata näré-saìgame smaryamäne
bhavati mukha-vikäraù suñöhu niñöhévanaà ca

“Since  my  mind  has  been  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  lotus  feet  of  Lord
Kåñëa, and I have been enjoying an ever new transcendental humor, whenever
I think of sex life with a woman, my face at once turns from it, and I spit at the
thought.”

is 

such  a 

Kåñëa  consciousness 

transcendentally  nice 

that
automatically material enjoyment becomes distasteful. It is as if a hungry man
had  satisfied  his  hunger  by  a  sufficient  quantity  of  nutritious  eatables.
Mahäräja Ambaréña also conquered a great yogé, Durväsä Muni, simply because
vai  manaù
his  mind  was  engaged 
kåñëa-pädäravindayor vacäàsi vaikuëöha-guëänuvarëane).

consciousness 

in  Kåñëa 

thing 

(sa 

TEXT  61

TaaiNa SavaRi<a Sa&YaMYa Yau¢- AaSaqTa MaTPar" )

vXae ih YaSYaeiNd]Yaai<a TaSYa Pa[ja Pa[iTaiïTaa )) 61 ))

täni sarväëi saàyamya
yukta äséta mat-paraù
vaçe hi yasyendriyäëi
tasya prajïä pratiñöhitä

SYNONYMS

täni—those senses; sarväëi—all; saàyamya—keeping under control;
yuktaù—engaged; äséta—should be situated; mat-paraù—in relationship with
Me; vaçe—in full subjugation; hi—certainly; yasya—one whose;

indriyäëi—senses; tasya—his; prajïä—consciousness; pratiñöhitä—fixed.

TRANSLATION

One who restrains his senses, keeping them under full control, and fixes his

consciousness upon Me, is known as a man of steady intelligence.

PURPORT

That  the  highest  conception  of  yoga  perfection  is  Kåñëa  consciousness  is
clearly explained in this verse. And unless one is Kåñëa conscious it is not at
all possible to control the senses. As cited above, the great sage Durväsä Muni
picked  a  quarrel  with  Mahäräja  Ambaréña,  and  Durväsä  Muni  unnecessarily
became  angry  out  of  pride  and  therefore  could  not  check  his  senses.  On  the
other hand, the king, although not as powerful a yogé as the sage, but a devotee
of  the  Lord,  silently  tolerated  all  the  sage’s  injustices  and  thereby  emerged
victorious.  The  king  was  able  to  control  his  senses  because  of  the  following
qualifications, as mentioned in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (9.4.18–20):

sa vai manaù kåñëa-pädäravindayor
vacäàsi vaikuëöha-guëänuvarëane
karau harer mandira-märjanädiñu
çrutià cakäräcyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-liìgälaya-darçane dåçau
tad-bhåtya-gätra-sparçe ’ìga-saìgamam
ghräëaà ca tat-päda-saroja-saurabhe
çrémat-tulasyä rasanäà tad-arpite

pädau hareù kñetra-padänusarpaëe
çiro håñékeça-padäbhivandane
kämaà ca däsye na tu käma-kämyayä
yathottama-çloka-janäçrayä ratiù

“King Ambaréña fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, engaged his
words in describing the abode of the Lord, his hands in cleansing the temple of

the  Lord,  his  ears  in  hearing  the  pastimes  of  the  Lord,  his  eyes  in  seeing  the
form of the Lord, his body in touching the body of the devotee, his nostrils in
smelling  the  flavor  of  the  flowers  offered  to  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Lord,  his
tongue in tasting the tulasé leaves offered to Him, his legs in traveling to the
holy  place  where  His  temple  is  situated,  his  head  in  offering  obeisances  unto
the  Lord,  and  his  desires  in  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  Lord...  and  all  these
qualifications made him fit to become a mat-para devotee of the Lord.”

svätma-dåñöiù 

The  word  mat-para  is  most  significant  in  this  connection.  How  one  can
become mat-para is described in the life of Mahäräja Ambaréña. Çréla Baladeva
Vidyäbhüñaëa, a great scholar and äcärya in the line of the mat-para, remarks,
sulabheti
sarvendriya-vijaya-pürvikä 
mad-bhakti-prabhävena 
bhävaù.  “The  senses  can  be  completely  controlled  only  by  the  strength  of
devotional service to Kåñëa.” Also, the example of fire is sometimes given: “As
a  blazing  fire  burns  everything  within  a  room,  Lord  Viñëu,  situated  in  the
heart  of  the  yogé,  burns  up  all  kinds  of  impurities.”  The  Yoga-sütra  also
prescribes meditation on Viñëu, and not meditation on the void. The so-called
yogés  who  meditate  on  something  which  is  not  on  the  Viñëu  platform  simply
waste  their  time  in  a  vain  search  after  some  phantasmagoria.  We  have  to  be
Kåñëa  conscious—devoted  to  the  Personality  of  Godhead.  This  is  the  aim  of
the real yoga.

TEXT  62

DYaaYaTaae ivzYaaNPau&Sa" Sa®STaezUPaJaaYaTae )

Sa®aTSaÅaYaTae k-aMa" k-aMaaT§-aeDaae_i>aJaaYaTae )) 62 ))

dhyäyato viñayän puàsaù
saìgas teñüpajäyate
saìgät saïjäyate kämaù
kämät krodho ’bhijäyate

SYNONYMS

dhyäyataù—while contemplating; viñayän—sense objects; puàsaù—of a
person; saìgaù—attachment; teñu—in the sense objects; upajäyate—develops;
saìgät—from attachment; saïjäyate—develops; kämaù—desire; kämät—from
desire; krodhaù—anger; abhijäyate—becomes manifest.

TRANSLATION

While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attachment

for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and from lust anger arises.

PURPORT

One  who  is  not  Kåñëa  conscious  is  subjected  to  material  desires  while
contemplating the objects of the senses. The senses require real engagements,
and if they are not engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
they  will  certainly  seek  engagement  in  the  service  of  materialism.  In  the
material  world  everyone,  including  Lord  Çiva  and  Lord  Brahmä—to  say
nothing  of  other  demigods  in  the  heavenly  planets—is  subjected  to  the
influence  of  sense  objects,  and  the  only  method  to  get  out  of  this  puzzle  of
material  existence  is  to  become  Kåñëa  conscious.  Lord  Çiva  was  deep  in
meditation, but when Pärvaté agitated him for sense pleasure, he agreed to the
proposal,  and  as  a  result  Kärtikeya  was  born.  When  Haridäsa  Öhäkura  was  a
young  devotee  of  the  Lord,  he  was  similarly  allured  by  the  incarnation  of
Mäyä-devé,  but  Haridäsa  easily  passed  the  test  because  of  his  unalloyed
devotion  to  Lord  Kåñëa.  As  illustrated  in  the  above-mentioned  verse  of  Çré
Yämunäcärya,  a  sincere  devotee  of  the  Lord  shuns  all  material  sense
enjoyment due to his higher taste for spiritual enjoyment in the association of
the  Lord.  That  is  the  secret  of  success.  One  who  is  not,  therefore,  in  Kåñëa
consciousness,  however  powerful  he  may  be  in  controlling  the  senses  by
artificial repression, is sure ultimately to fail, for the slightest thought of sense
pleasure will agitate him to gratify his desires.

TEXT  63

§-aeDaaÙviTa SaMMaaeh" SaMMaaehaTSMa*iTaiv>a]Ma" )

SMa*iTa>a]&Xaad(buiÖNaaXaae buiÖNaaXaaTPa[<aXYaiTa )) 63 ))

krodhäd bhavati sammohaù
sammohät småti-vibhramaù
småti-bhraàçäd buddhi-näço
buddhi-näçät praëaçyati

SYNONYMS

krodhät—from anger; bhavati—takes place; sammohaù—perfect illusion;
sammohät—from illusion; småti—of memory; vibhramaù—bewilderment;
småti-bhraàçät—after bewilderment of memory; buddhi-näçaù—loss of
intelligence; buddhi-näçät—and from loss of intelligence; praëaçyati—one falls
down.

TRANSLATION

From anger, complete delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of

memory. When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when
intelligence is lost one falls down again into the material pool.

PURPORT

Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has given us this direction:

präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo
vairägyaà phalgu kathyate
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.258)

By development of Kåñëa consciousness one can know that everything has
its use in the service of the Lord. Those who are without knowledge of Kåñëa
consciousness artificially try to avoid material objects, and as a result, although

they desire liberation from material bondage, they do not attain to the perfect
stage  of  renunciation.  Their  so-called  renunciation  is  called  phalgu,  or  less
important. On the other hand, a person in Kåñëa consciousness knows how to
use  everything  in  the  service  of  the  Lord;  therefore  he  does  not  become  a
victim of material consciousness. For example, for an impersonalist, the Lord,
or the Absolute, being impersonal, cannot eat. Whereas an impersonalist tries
to avoid good eatables, a devotee knows that Kåñëa is the supreme enjoyer and
that  He  eats  all  that  is  offered  to  Him  in  devotion.  So,  after  offering  good
eatables  to  the  Lord,  the  devotee  takes  the  remnants,  called  prasädam.  Thus
everything  becomes  spiritualized,  and  there  is  no  danger  of  a  downfall.  The
devotee  takes  prasädam  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  whereas  the  nondevotee
rejects it as material. The impersonalist, therefore, cannot enjoy life, due to his
artificial renunciation; and for this reason, a slight agitation of the mind pulls
him down again into the pool of material existence. It is said that such a soul,
even though rising up to the point of liberation, falls down again due to his not
having support in devotional service.

TEXT  64

raGaÜezivMau¢E-STau ivzYaaiNaiNd]YaEêrNa( )

AaTMavXYaEivRDaeYaaTMaa Pa[SaadMaiDaGaC^iTa )) 64 ))

räga-dveña-vimuktais tu
viñayän indriyaiç caran
ätma-vaçyair vidheyätmä
prasädam adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

räga—attachment; dveña—and detachment; vimuktaiù—by one who has
become free from; tu—but; viñayän—sense objects; indriyaiù—by the senses;
caran—acting upon; ätma-vaçyaiù—under one’s control; vidheya-ätmä—one
who follows regulated freedom; prasädam—the mercy of the Lord;

adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

But a person free from all attachment and aversion and able to control his
senses through regulative principles of freedom can obtain the complete mercy
of the Lord.

PURPORT

It is already explained that one may externally control the senses by some
artificial  process,  but  unless  the  senses  are  engaged  in  the  transcendental
service of the Lord, there is every chance of a fall. Although the person in full
Kåñëa  consciousness  may  apparently  be  on  the  sensual  plane,  because  of  his
being  Kåñëa  conscious  he  has  no  attachment to sensual activities. The Kåñëa
conscious person is concerned only with the satisfaction of Kåñëa, and nothing
else.  Therefore  he  is  transcendental  to  all  attachment  and  detachment.  If
Kåñëa wants, the devotee can do anything which is ordinarily undesirable; and
if  Kåñëa  does  not  want,  he  shall  not  do  that  which  he  would  have  ordinarily
done  for  his  own  satisfaction.  Therefore  to  act  or  not  to  act  is  within  his
control because he acts only under the direction of Kåñëa. This consciousness
is the causeless mercy of the Lord, which the devotee can achieve in spite of
his being attached to the sensual platform.

TEXT  65

Pa[Saade SavRdu"%aNaa& haiNarSYaaePaJaaYaTae )

Pa[SaàceTaSaae ùaéu buiÖ" PaYaRviTaïTae )) 65 ))

prasäde sarva-duùkhänäà
hänir asyopajäyate
prasanna-cetaso hy äçu
buddhiù paryavatiñöhate

SYNONYMS

prasäde—on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva—of all;
duùkhänäm—material miseries; häniù—destruction; asya—his;
upajäyate—takes place; prasanna-cetasaù—of the happy-minded;
hi—certainly; äçu—very soon; buddhiù—intelligence; pari—sufficiently;
avatiñöhate—becomes established.

TRANSLATION

For one thus satisfied [in Kåñëa consciousness], the threefold miseries of

material existence exist no longer; in such satisfied consciousness, one’s
intelligence is soon well established.

TEXT  66

NaaiSTa buiÖrYau¢-SYa Na caYau¢-SYa >aavNaa )

Na ca>aavYaTa" XaaiNTarXaaNTaSYa ku-Ta" Sau%Ma( )) 66 ))

nästi buddhir ayuktasya
na cäyuktasya bhävanä
na cäbhävayataù çäntir
açäntasya kutaù sukham

SYNONYMS

na asti—there cannot be; buddhiù—transcendental intelligence;
ayuktasya—of one who is not connected (with Kåñëa consciousness); na—not;
ca—and; ayuktasya—of one devoid of Kåñëa consciousness; bhävanä—fixed
mind (in happiness); na—not; ca—and; abhävayataù—of one who is not fixed;
çäntiù—peace; açäntasya—of the unpeaceful; kutaù—where is;
sukham—happiness.

TRANSLATION

One who is not connected with the Supreme [in Kåñëa consciousness] can
have neither transcendental intelligence nor a steady mind, without which there
is no possibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without peace?

PURPORT

Unless one is in Kåñëa consciousness, there is no possibility of peace. So it is
confirmed in the Fifth Chapter (5.29) that when one understands that Kåñëa
is the only enjoyer of all the good results of sacrifice and penance, that He is
the proprietor of all universal manifestations, and that He is the real friend of
all living entities, then only can one have real peace. Therefore, if one is not
in Kåñëa consciousness, there cannot be a final goal for the mind. Disturbance
is due to want of an ultimate goal, and when one is certain that Kåñëa is the
enjoyer, proprietor and friend of everyone and everything, then one can, with
a  steady  mind,  bring  about  peace.  Therefore,  one  who  is  engaged  without  a
relationship  with  Kåñëa  is  certainly  always  in  distress  and  is  without  peace,
however much he may make a show of peace and spiritual advancement in life.
Kåñëa  consciousness  is  a  self-manifested  peaceful  condition  which  can  be
achieved only in relationship with Kåñëa.

TEXT  67

wiNd]Yaa<aa& ih crTaa& YaNMaNaae_NauivDaqYaTae )

TadSYa hriTa Pa[ja& vaYauNaaRviMavaM>aiSa )) 67 ))

indriyäëäà hi caratäà
yan mano ’nuvidhéyate
tad asya harati prajïäà
väyur nävam ivämbhasi

SYNONYMS

indriyäëäm—of the senses; hi—certainly; caratäm—while roaming; yat—with
which; manaù—the mind; anuvidhéyate—becomes constantly engaged;
tat—that; asya—his; harati—takes away; prajïäm—intelligence;
väyuù—wind; nävam—a boat; iva—like; ambhasi—on the water.

TRANSLATION

As a strong wind sweeps away a boat on the water, even one of the roaming

senses on which the mind focuses can carry away a man’s intelligence.

PURPORT

Unless all of the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, even one of
them engaged in sense gratification can deviate the devotee from the path of
transcendental advancement. As mentioned in the life of Mahäräja Ambaréña,
all of the senses must be engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, for that is the correct
technique for controlling the mind.

TEXT  68

TaSMaaÛSYa Mahabahae iNaGa*hqTaaiNa SavRXa" )

wiNd]Yaa<aqiNd]YaaQaeR>YaSTaSYa Pa[ja Pa[iTaiïTaa )) 68 ))

tasmäd yasya mahä-bäho
nigåhétäni sarvaçaù
indriyäëéndriyärthebhyas
tasya prajïä pratiñöhitä

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; yasya—whose; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one;
nigåhétäni—so curbed down; sarvaçaù—all around; indriyäëi—the senses;

indriya-arthebhyaù—from sense objects; tasya—his; prajïä—intelligence;
pratiñöhitä—fixed.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from their

objects is certainly of steady intelligence.

PURPORT

One  can  curb  the  forces  of  sense  gratification  only  by  means  of  Kåñëa
consciousness, or engaging all the senses in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord. As enemies are curbed by superior force, the senses can similarly
be curbed, not by any human endeavor, but only by keeping them engaged in
the  service  of  the  Lord.  One  who  has  understood  this—that  only  by  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  one  really  established  in  intelligence  and  that  one  should
practice this art under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master—is called
sädhaka, or a suitable candidate for liberation.

TEXT  69

Yaa iNaXaa SavR>aUTaaNaa& TaSYaa& JaaGaiTaR Sa&YaMaq )

YaSYaa& JaaGa]iTa >aUTaaiNa Saa iNaXaa PaXYaTaae MauNae" )) 69 ))

yä niçä sarva-bhütänäà
tasyäà jägarti saàyamé
yasyäà jägrati bhütäni
sä niçä paçyato muneù

SYNONYMS

yä—what; niçä—is night; sarva—all; bhütänäm—of living entities; tasyäm—in
that; jägarti—is wakeful; saàyamé—the self-controlled; yasyäm—in which;
jägrati—are awake; bhütäni—all beings; sä—that is; niçä—night;

paçyataù—for the introspective; muneù—sage.

TRANSLATION

What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled;

and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the introspective sage.

PURPORT

There  are  two  classes  of  intelligent  men.  One  is  intelligent  in  material
activities  for  sense  gratification,  and  the  other  is  introspective  and  awake  to
the  cultivation  of  self-realization.  Activities  of  the  introspective  sage,  or
thoughtful  man,  are  night  for  persons  materially  absorbed.  Materialistic
persons remain asleep in such a night due to their ignorance of self-realization.
The  introspective  sage  remains  alert  in  the  “night”  of  the  materialistic  men.
The sage feels transcendental pleasure in the gradual advancement of spiritual
in  materialistic  activities,  being  asleep  to
culture,  whereas  the  man 
self-realization, dreams of varieties of sense pleasure, feeling sometimes happy
and  sometimes  distressed  in  his  sleeping  condition.  The  introspective  man  is
always indifferent to materialistic happiness and distress. He goes on with his
self-realization activities undisturbed by material reactions.

TEXT  70

AaPaUYaRMaa<aMacl/Pa[iTaï&

 SaMaud]MaaPa" Pa[ivXaiNTa YaÜTa( )

TaÜTk-aMaa Ya& Pa[ivXaiNTa SaveR

 Sa XaaiNTaMaaPanaeiTa Na k-aMak-aMaq )) 70 ))

äpüryamäëam acala-pratiñöhaà
samudram äpaù praviçanti yadvat
tadvat kämä yaà praviçanti sarve
sa çäntim äpnoti na käma-kämé

SYNONYMS

äpüryamäëam—always being filled; acala-pratiñöham—steadily situated;
samudram—the ocean; äpaù—waters; praviçanti—enter; yadvat—as;
tadvat—so; kämäù—desires; yam—unto whom; praviçanti—enter; sarve—all;
saù—that person; çäntim—peace; äpnoti—achieves; na—not;
käma-kämé—one who desires to fulfill desires.

TRANSLATION

A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires—that enter

like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but is always still—can
alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.

PURPORT

Although the vast ocean is always filled with water, it is always, especially
during  the  rainy  season,  being  filled  with  much  more  water.  But  the  ocean
remains the same—steady; it is not agitated, nor does it cross beyond the limit
of its brink. That is also true of a person fixed in Kåñëa consciousness. As long
as one has the material body, the demands of the body for sense gratification
will continue. The devotee, however, is not disturbed by such desires, because
of his fullness. A Kåñëa conscious man is not in need of anything, because the
Lord fulfills all his material necessities. Therefore he is like the ocean—always
full in himself. Desires may come to him like the waters of the rivers that flow
into  the  ocean,  but  he  is  steady  in  his  activities,  and  he  is  not  even  slightly
disturbed  by  desires  for  sense  gratification.  That  is  the  proof  of  a  Kåñëa
conscious  man—one  who  has  lost  all  inclinations  for  material  sense
gratification, although the desires are present. Because he remains satisfied in
the  transcendental  loving  service  of  the  Lord, he can remain steady, like the
ocean,  and  therefore  enjoy  full  peace.  Others,  however,  who  want  to  fulfill
desires  even  up  to  the  limit  of  liberation,  what  to  speak  of  material  success,
never  attain  peace.  The  fruitive  workers,  the  salvationists,  and  also  the  yogés

who are after mystic powers are all unhappy because of unfulfilled desires. But
the person in Kåñëa consciousness is happy in the service of the Lord, and he
has no desires to be fulfilled. In fact, he does not even desire liberation from
the  so-called  material  bondage.  The  devotees  of  Kåñëa  have  no  material
desires, and therefore they are in perfect peace.

TEXT  71

ivhaYa k-aMaaNYa" SavaRNPauMaa&êriTa iNa"SPa*h" )

iNaMaRMaae iNarhªar" Sa XaaiNTaMaiDaGaC^iTa )) 71 ))

vihäya kämän yaù sarvän
pumäàç carati niùspåhaù
nirmamo nirahaìkäraù
sa çäntim adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

vihäya—giving up; kämän—material desires for sense gratification; yaù—who;
sarvän—all; pumän—a person; carati—lives; niùspåhaù—desireless;
nirmamaù—without a sense of proprietorship; nirahaìkäraù—without false
ego; saù—he; çäntim—perfect peace; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who lives free
from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of false
ego—he alone can attain real peace.

PURPORT

To  become  desireless  means  not  to  desire  anything  for  sense  gratification.
In other words, desire for becoming Kåñëa conscious is actually desirelessness.
To  understand  one’s  actual  position  as  the  eternal  servitor  of  Kåñëa,  without

falsely  claiming  this  material  body  to  be  oneself  and  without  falsely  claiming
proprietorship  over  anything  in  the  world,  is  the  perfect  stage  of  Kåñëa
consciousness.  One  who  is  situated  in  this  perfect  stage  knows  that  because
Kåñëa  is  the  proprietor  of  everything,  everything  must  be  used  for  the
satisfaction  of  Kåñëa.  Arjuna  did  not  want  to  fight  for  his  own  sense
satisfaction,  but  when  he  became  fully  Kåñëa  conscious  he  fought  because
Kåñëa  wanted  him  to  fight.  For  himself  there  was  no  desire  to  fight,  but  for
Kåñëa the same Arjuna fought to his best ability. Real desirelessness is desire
for  the  satisfaction  of  Kåñëa,  not  an  artificial  attempt  to  abolish  desires.  The
living entity cannot be desireless or senseless, but he does have to change the
quality  of  the  desires.  A  materially  desireless  person  certainly  knows  that
everything  belongs  to  Kåñëa  (éçäväsyam  idaà  sarvam),  and  therefore  he  does
not falsely claim proprietorship over anything. This transcendental knowledge
is based on self-realization—namely, knowing perfectly well that every living
entity is an eternal part and parcel of Kåñëa in spiritual identity, and that the
eternal position of the living entity is therefore never on the level of Kåñëa or
greater  than  Him.  This  understanding  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  the  basic
principle of real peace.

TEXT  72

Wza b]aøq iSQaiTa" PaaQaR NaENaa& Pa[aPYa ivMauùiTa )

iSQaTvaSYaaMaNTak-ale/_iPa b]øiNavaR<aMa*C^iTa )) 72 ))

eñä brähmé sthitiù pärtha
nainäà präpya vimuhyati
sthitväsyäm anta-käle ’pi
brahma-nirväëam åcchati

SYNONYMS

eñä—this; brähmé—spiritual; sthitiù—situation; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
na—never; enäm—this; präpya—achieving; vimuhyati—one is bewildered;

sthitvä—being situated; asyäm—in this; anta-käle—at the end of life;
api—also; brahma-nirväëam—the spiritual kingdom of God; åcchati—one
attains.

TRANSLATION

That is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining which a man is
not bewildered. If one is thus situated even at the hour of death, one can enter
into the kingdom of God.

PURPORT

One  can  attain  Kåñëa  consciousness  or  divine  life  at  once,  within  a
second—or one may not attain such a state of life even after millions of births.
It  is  only  a  matter  of  understanding  and  accepting  the  fact.  Khaöväìga
Mahäräja  attained  this  state  of  life  just  a  few  minutes  before  his  death,  by
surrendering  unto  Kåñëa.  Nirväëa  means  ending  the  process  of  materialistic
life. According to Buddhist philosophy, there is only void after the completion
of  this  material  life,  but  Bhagavad-gétä  teaches  differently.  Actual  life  begins
after  the  completion  of  this  material  life.  For  the  gross  materialist  it  is
sufficient  to  know  that  one  has  to  end  this  materialistic  way  of  life,  but  for
persons  who  are  spiritually  advanced,  there  is  another  life  after  this
materialistic  life.  Before  ending  this  life,  if  one  fortunately  becomes  Kåñëa
conscious,  he  at  once  attains  the  stage  of  brahma-nirväëa.  There  is  no
difference  between  the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  devotional  service  of  the
Lord.  Since  both  of  them  are  on  the  absolute  plane,  to  be  engaged  in  the
transcendental  loving  service  of  the  Lord  is  to  have  attained  the  spiritual
kingdom.  In  the  material  world  there  are  activities  of  sense  gratification,
whereas  in  the  spiritual  world  there  are  activities  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.
Attainment  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  even  during  this  life  is  immediate
attainment  of  Brahman,  and  one  who  is  situated  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  has
certainly already entered into the kingdom of God.

Brahman is just the opposite of matter. Therefore brähmé sthiti means “not
on  the  platform  of  material  activities.”  Devotional  service  of  the  Lord  is

accepted  in  the  Bhagavad-gétä  as  the  liberated  stage  (sa  guëän  samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya  kalpate).  Therefore,  brähmé  sthiti  is  liberation  from  material
bondage.

Çréla  Bhaktivinoda  Öhäkura  has  summarized  this  Second  Chapter  of  the
Bhagavad-gétä  as  being  the  contents  for  the  whole  text.  In  the Bhagavad-gétä,
the subject matters are karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga, and bhakti-yoga. In the Second
Chapter karma-yoga and jïäna-yoga have been clearly discussed, and a glimpse
of bhakti-yoga has also been given, as the contents for the complete text.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Second Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of its Contents.

- CHAPTER 3 -
Karma-yoga

TEXT  1

AJauRNa ovac

JYaaYaSaq ceTk-MaR<aSTae MaTaa buiÖJaRNaadRNa )

TaiTk&- k-MaRi<a gaaere Maa& iNaYaaeJaYaiSa ke-Xav )) 1 ))

arjuna uväca
jyäyasé cet karmaëas te
matä buddhir janärdana
tat kià karmaëi ghore mäà
niyojayasi keçava

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; jyäyasé—better; cet—if; karmaëaù—than fruitive
action; te—by You; matä—is considered; buddhiù—intelligence;
janärdana—O Kåñëa; tat—therefore; kim—why; karmaëi—in action;
ghore—ghastly; mäm—me; niyojayasi—You are engaging; keçava—O Kåñëa.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Janärdana, O Keçava, why do You want to engage me in this

ghastly warfare, if You think that intelligence is better than fruitive work?

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  Çré  Kåñëa  has  very  elaborately
described the constitution of the soul in the previous chapter, with a view to
delivering  His  intimate  friend  Arjuna  from  the  ocean  of  material  grief.  And
the  path  of  realization  has  been  recommended:  buddhi-yoga,  or  Kåñëa
consciousness. Sometimes Kåñëa consciousness is misunderstood to be inertia,
and one with such a misunderstanding often withdraws to a secluded place to
become  fully  Kåñëa  conscious  by  chanting  the  holy  name  of  Lord  Kåñëa.  But
without  being  trained  in  the  philosophy  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  it  is  not
advisable to chant the holy name of Kåñëa in a secluded place, where one may
acquire only cheap adoration from the innocent public. Arjuna also thought of
Kåñëa  consciousness  or  buddhi-yoga,  or  intelligence  in  spiritual  advancement
of knowledge, as something like retirement from active life and the practice of
penance  and  austerity  at  a  secluded  place.  In  other  words,  he  wanted  to
skillfully avoid the fighting by using Kåñëa consciousness as an excuse. But as a
sincere student, he placed the matter before his master and questioned Kåñëa
as  to  his  best  course  of  action.  In  answer,  Lord  Kåñëa  elaborately  explained
karma-yoga, or work in Kåñëa consciousness, in this Third Chapter.

TEXT  2

VYaaiMaé[e<aev vaKYaeNa buiÖ& MaaehYaSaqv Mae )

Tadek&- vd iNaiêTYa YaeNa é[eYaae_hMaaPanuYaaMa( )) 2 ))

vyämiçreëeva väkyena
buddhià mohayaséva me
tad ekaà vada niçcitya
yena çreyo ’ham äpnuyäm

SYNONYMS

vyämiçreëa—by equivocal; iva—certainly; väkyena—words;
buddhim—intelligence; mohayasi—You are bewildering; iva—certainly;
me—my; tat—therefore; ekam—only one; vada—please tell;
niçcitya—ascertaining; yena—by which; çreyaù—real benefit; aham—I;
äpnuyäm—may have.

TRANSLATION

My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions. Therefore,

please tell me decisively which will be most beneficial for me.

PURPORT

In  the  previous  chapter,  as  a  prelude  to  the  Bhagavad-gétä,  many  different
paths were explained, such as säìkhya-yoga, buddhi-yoga, control of the senses
by intelligence, work without fruitive desire, and the position of the neophyte.
This was all presented unsystematically. A more organized outline of the path
would be necessary for action and understanding. Arjuna, therefore, wanted to
clear  up  these  apparently  confusing  matters  so  that  any  common  man  could
accept  them  without  misinterpretation.  Although  Kåñëa  had  no  intention  of
confusing  Arjuna  by  any  jugglery  of  words,  Arjuna  could  not  follow  the
process of Kåñëa consciousness—either by inertia or by active service. In other
words,  by  his  questions  he  is  clearing  the  path  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  for  all
students who seriously want to understand the mystery of the Bhagavad-gétä.

TEXT  3

é[q>aGavaNauvac

l/aeke-_iSMaiNÜivDaa iNaïa Paura Pa[ae¢-a MaYaaNaga )

jaNaYaaeGaeNa Saa&:YaaNaa& k-MaRYaaeGaeNa YaaeiGaNaaMa( )) 3 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
loke ’smin dvi-vidhä niñöhä
purä proktä mayänagha
jïäna-yogena säìkhyänäà
karma-yogena yoginäm

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; loke—in the
world; asmin—this; dvi-vidhä—two kinds of; niñöhä—faith; purä—formerly;
proktä—were said; mayä—by Me; anagha—O sinless one; jïäna-yogena—by
the linking process of knowledge; säìkhyänäm—of the empiric philosophers;
karma-yogena—by the linking process of devotion; yoginäm—of the devotees.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O sinless Arjuna, I have already
explained that there are two classes of men who try to realize the self. Some are
inclined to understand it by empirical, philosophical speculation, and others by
devotional service.

PURPORT

In  the  Second  Chapter,  verse  39,  the  Lord  explained  two  kinds  of
procedures—namely  säìkhya-yoga  and  karma-yoga,  or  buddhi-yoga.  In  this
verse, the Lord explains the same more clearly. Säìkhya-yoga, or the analytical
study of the nature of spirit and matter, is the subject matter for persons who

are  inclined  to  speculate  and  understand  things  by  experimental  knowledge
and  philosophy.  The  other  class  of  men  work  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  as  it  is
explained  in  the  61st  verse  of  the  Second  Chapter.  The  Lord  has  explained,
also  in  the  39th  verse,  that  by  working  by  the  principles  of  buddhi-yoga,  or
Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  can  be  relieved  from  the  bonds  of  action;  and,
furthermore, there is no flaw in the process. The same principle is more clearly
explained in the 61st verse—that this buddhi-yoga is to depend entirely on the
Supreme (or more specifically, on Kåñëa), and in this way all the senses can be
the  yogas  are
brought  under  control  very  easily.  Therefore,  both 
interdependent,  as  religion  and  philosophy.  Religion  without  philosophy  is
sentiment,  or  sometimes  fanaticism,  while  philosophy  without  religion  is
mental speculation. The ultimate goal is Kåñëa, because the philosophers who
are also sincerely searching after the Absolute Truth come in the end to Kåñëa
consciousness. This is also stated in the Bhagavad-gétä. The whole process is to
understand  the  real  position  of  the  self  in  relation  to  the  Superself.  The
indirect  process  is  philosophical  speculation,  by  which,  gradually,  one  may
come  to  the  point  of  Kåñëa  consciousness;  and  the  other  process  is  directly
connecting with everything in Kåñëa consciousness. Of these two, the path of
Kåñëa  consciousness  is  better  because  it  does  not  depend  on  purifying  the
senses  by  a  philosophical  process.  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  itself  the  purifying
process,  and  by  the  direct  method  of  devotional  service  it  is  simultaneously
easy and sublime.

TEXT  4

Na k-MaR<aaMaNaarM>aaàEZk-MYa| Pauåzae_énuTae )

Na c SaNNYaSaNaadev iSaiÖ& SaMaiDaGaC^iTa )) 4 ))

na karmaëäm anärambhän
naiñkarmyaà puruño ’çnute
na ca sannyasanäd eva
siddhià samadhigacchati

SYNONYMS

na—not; karmaëäm—of prescribed duties; anärambhät—by nonperformance;
naiñkarmyam—freedom from reaction; puruñaù—a man; açnute—achieves;
na—nor; ca—also; sannyasanät—by renunciation; eva—simply;
siddhim—success; samadhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

Not by merely abstaining from work can one achieve freedom from reaction,

nor by renunciation alone can one attain perfection.

PURPORT

The renounced order of life can be accepted when one has been purified by
the  discharge  of  the  prescribed  form  of  duties  which  are  laid  down  just  to
purify the hearts of materialistic men. Without purification, one cannot attain
success by abruptly adopting the fourth order of life (sannyäsa). According to
the  empirical  philosophers,  simply  by  adopting  sannyäsa,  or  retiring  from
fruitive activities, one at once becomes as good as Näräyaëa. But Lord Kåñëa
does  not  approve  this  principle.  Without  purification  of  heart,  sannyäsa  is
simply a disturbance to the social order. On the other hand, if someone takes
to  the  transcendental  service  of  the  Lord,  even  without  discharging  his
prescribed duties, whatever he may be able to advance in the cause is accepted
by the Lord (buddhi-yoga). Sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya träyate mahato bhayät.
Even  a  slight  performance  of  such  a  principle  enables  one  to  overcome  great
difficulties.

TEXT  5

Na ih k-iêT+a<aMaiPa JaaTau iTaïTYak-MaRk*-Ta( )

k-aYaRTae ùvXa" k-MaR SavR" Pa[k*-iTaJaEGauR<aE" )) 5 ))

na hi kaçcit kñaëam api
jätu tiñöhaty akarma-kåt
käryate hy avaçaù karma
sarvaù prakåti-jair guëaiù

SYNONYMS

na—nor; hi—certainly; kaçcit—anyone; kñaëam—a moment; api—also;
jätu—at any time; tiñöhati—remains; akarma-kåt—without doing something;
käryate—is forced to do; hi—certainly; avaçaù—helplessly; karma—work;
sarvaù—all; prakåti-jaiù—born of the modes of material nature; guëaiù—by
the qualities.

TRANSLATION

Everyone is forced to act helplessly according to the qualities he has acquired

from the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing
something, not even for a moment.

PURPORT

It  is  not  a  question  of  embodied  life,  but  it  is  the  nature  of  the  soul  to  be
always  active.  Without  the  presence  of  the  spirit  soul,  the  material  body
cannot move. The body is only a dead vehicle to be worked by the spirit soul,
which is always active and cannot stop even for a moment. As such, the spirit
soul has to be engaged in the good work of Kåñëa consciousness, otherwise it
will  be  engaged  in  occupations  dictated  by  illusory  energy.  In  contact  with
material energy, the spirit soul acquires material modes, and to purify the soul
from such affinities it is necessary to engage in the prescribed duties enjoined
in  the  çästras.  But  if  the  soul  is  engaged  in  his  natural  function  of  Kåñëa
for  him.  The
consciousness,  whatever  he 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.17) affirms this:

is  able  to  do 

is  good 

tyaktvä sva-dharmaà caraëämbujaà harer
bhajann apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi

yatra kva väbhadram abhüd amuñya kià
ko värtha äpto ’bhajatäà sva-dharmataù

“If  someone  takes  to  Kåñëa  consciousness,  even  though  he  may  not  follow
the prescribed duties in the çästras or execute the devotional service properly,
and even though he may fall down from the standard, there is no loss or evil
for him. But if he carries out all the injunctions for purification in the çästras,
what does it avail him if he is not Kåñëa conscious?” So the purificatory process
is  necessary  for  reaching  this  point  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Therefore,
sannyäsa,  or  any  purificatory  process,  is  to  help  reach  the  ultimate  goal  of
becoming Kåñëa conscious, without which everything is considered a failure.

TEXT  6

k-MaeRiNd]Yaai<a Sa&YaMYa Ya AaSTae MaNaSaa SMarNa( )

wiNd]YaaQaaRiNvMaU!aTMaa iMaQYaacar" Sa oCYaTae )) 6 ))

karmendriyäëi saàyamya
ya äste manasä smaran
indriyärthän vimüòhätmä
mithyäcäraù sa ucyate

SYNONYMS

karma-indriyäëi—the five working sense organs; saàyamya—controlling;
yaù—anyone who; äste—remains; manasä—by the mind; smaran—thinking
of; indriya-arthän—sense objects; vimüòha—foolish; ätmä—soul;
mithyä-äcäraù—pretender; saù—he; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

One who restrains the senses of action but whose mind dwells on sense

objects certainly deludes himself and is called a pretender.

PURPORT

There are many pretenders who refuse to work in Kåñëa consciousness but
make  a  show  of  meditation,  while  actually  dwelling  within  the  mind  upon
sense enjoyment. Such pretenders may also speak on dry philosophy in order
to  bluff  sophisticated  followers,  but  according  to  this  verse  these  are  the
greatest cheaters. For sense enjoyment one can act in any capacity of the social
order,  but  if  one  follows  the  rules  and  regulations  of  his  particular  status,  he
can make gradual progress in purifying his existence. But he who makes a show
of  being  a  yogé  while  actually  searching  for  the  objects  of  sense  gratification
must  be  called  the  greatest  cheater,  even  though  he  sometimes  speaks  of
philosophy.  His  knowledge  has  no  value,  because  the  effects  of  such  a  sinful
man’s  knowledge  are  taken  away  by  the  illusory  energy  of  the  Lord.  Such  a
pretender’s mind is always impure, and therefore his show of yogic meditation
has no value whatsoever.

TEXT  7

YaiSTviNd]Yaai<a MaNaSaa iNaYaMYaar>aTae_JauRNa )

k-MaeRiNd]YaE" k-MaRYaaeGaMaSa¢-" Sa iviXaZYaTae )) 7 ))

yas tv indriyäëi manasä
niyamyärabhate ’rjuna
karmendriyaiù karma-yogam
asaktaù sa viçiñyate

SYNONYMS

yaù—one who; tu—but; indriyäëi—the senses; manasä—by the mind;
niyamya—regulating; ärabhate—begins; arjuna—O Arjuna;
karma-indriyaiù—by the active sense organs; karma-yogam—devotion;
asaktaù—without attachment; saù—he; viçiñyate—is by far the better.

TRANSLATION

On the other hand, if a sincere person tries to control the active senses by
the mind and begins karma-yoga [in Kåñëa consciousness] without attachment,
he is by far superior.

PURPORT

Instead  of  becoming  a  pseudo  transcendentalist  for  the  sake  of  wanton
living and sense enjoyment, it is far better to remain in one’s own business and
execute  the  purpose  of  life,  which  is  to  get  free  from  material  bondage  and
enter into the kingdom of God. The prime svärtha-gati, or goal of self-interest,
is  to  reach  Viñëu.  The  whole  institution  of  varëa  and  äçrama  is  designed  to
help us reach this goal of life. A householder can also reach this destination by
regulated  service  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  For  self-realization,  one  can  live  a
controlled  life,  as  prescribed  in  the  çästras,  and  continue  carrying  out  his
business without attachment, and in that way make progress. A sincere person
who  follows  this  method  is  far  better  situated  than  the  false  pretender  who
adopts  show-bottle  spiritualism  to  cheat  the  innocent  public.  A  sincere
sweeper in the street is far better than the charlatan meditator who meditates
only for the sake of making a living.

TEXT  8

iNaYaTa& ku-å k-MaR Tv& k-MaR JYaaYaae ùk-MaR<a" )

XarqrYaa}aaiPa c Tae Na Pa[iSaÖyedk-MaR<a" )) 8 ))

niyataà kuru karma tvaà
karma jyäyo hy akarmaëaù
çaréra-yäträpi ca te
na prasiddhyed akarmaëaù

SYNONYMS

niyatam—prescribed; kuru—do; karma—duties; tvam—you; karma—work;
jyäyaù—better; hi—certainly; akarmaëaù—than no work; çaréra—bodily;
yäträ—maintenance; api—even; ca—also; te—your; na—never;
prasiddhyet—is effected; akarmaëaù—without work.

TRANSLATION

Perform your prescribed duty, for doing so is better than not working. One

cannot even maintain one’s physical body without work.

PURPORT

There  are  many  pseudo  meditators  who  misrepresent  themselves  as
belonging to high parentage, and great professional men who falsely pose that
they  have  sacrificed  everything  for  the  sake  of  advancement  in  spiritual  life.
Lord  Kåñëa  did  not  want  Arjuna  to  become  a  pretender.  Rather,  the  Lord
desired  that  Arjuna  perform  his  prescribed  duties  as  set  forth  for  kñatriyas.
Arjuna  was  a  householder  and  a  military  general,  and  therefore  it  was  better
for him to remain as such and perform his religious duties as prescribed for the
householder kñatriya. Such activities gradually cleanse the heart of a mundane
man and free him from material contamination. So-called renunciation for the
purpose  of  maintenance  is  never  approved  by  the  Lord,  nor  by  any  religious
scripture. After all, one has to maintain one’s body and soul together by some
work.  Work  should  not  be  given  up  capriciously,  without  purification  of
materialistic  propensities.  Anyone  who  is  in  the  material  world  is  certainly
possessed  of  the  impure  propensity  for  lording  it  over  material  nature,  or,  in
other  words,  for  sense  gratification.  Such  polluted  propensities  have  to  be
cleared.  Without  doing  so,  through  prescribed  duties,  one  should  never
attempt  to  become  a  so-called  transcendentalist,  renouncing  work  and  living
at the cost of others.

TEXT  9

YajaQaaRTk-MaR<aae_NYa}a l/aek-ae_Ya& k-MaRbNDaNa" )

TadQa| k-MaR k-aENTaeYa Mau¢-Sa®" SaMaacr )) 9 ))

yajïärthät karmaëo ’nyatra
loko ’yaà karma-bandhanaù
tad-arthaà karma kaunteya
mukta-saìgaù samäcara

SYNONYMS

yajïa-arthät—done only for the sake of Yajïa, or Viñëu; karmaëaù—than
work; anyatra—otherwise; lokaù—world; ayam—this;
karma-bandhanaù—bondage by work; tat—of Him; artham—for the sake;
karma—work; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; mukta-saìgaù—liberated from
association; samäcara—do perfectly.

TRANSLATION

Work done as a sacrifice for Viñëu has to be performed, otherwise work
causes bondage in this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunté, perform your
prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will always remain
free from bondage.

PURPORT

Since  one  has  to  work  even  for  the  simple  maintenance  of  the  body,  the
prescribed  duties  for  a  particular  social  position  and  quality  are  so  made  that
that  purpose  can  be  fulfilled.  Yajïa  means  Lord  Viñëu,  or  sacrificial
performances.  All  sacrificial  performances  also  are  meant  for  the  satisfaction
of  Lord  Viñëu.  The  Vedas  enjoin:  yajïo  vai  viñëuù.  In  other  words,  the  same
purpose  is  served  whether  one  performs  prescribed  yajïas  or  directly  serves
Lord  Viñëu.  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  therefore  performance  of  yajïa  as  it  is

prescribed  in  this  verse.  The  varëäçrama  institution  also  aims  at  satisfying
Lord  Viñëu.  Varëäçramäcäravatä  puruñeëa  paraù  pumän/  viñëur  ärädhyate
(Viñëu Puräëa 3.8.8).

Therefore  one  has  to  work  for  the  satisfaction  of  Viñëu.  Any  other  work
done in this material world will be a cause of bondage, for both good and evil
work  have  their  reactions,  and  any  reaction  binds  the  performer.  Therefore,
one has to work in Kåñëa consciousness to satisfy Kåñëa (or Viñëu); and while
performing  such  activities  one  is  in  a  liberated  stage.  This  is  the  great  art  of
doing  work,  and  in  the  beginning  this  process  requires  very  expert  guidance.
One  should  therefore  act  very  diligently,  under  the  expert  guidance  of  a
devotee of Lord Kåñëa, or under the direct instruction of Lord Kåñëa Himself
(under  whom  Arjuna  had  the  opportunity  to  work).  Nothing  should  be
performed  for  sense  gratification,  but  everything  should  be  done  for  the
satisfaction of Kåñëa. This practice will not only save one from the reaction of
work,  but  also  gradually  elevate  one  to  transcendental  loving  service  of  the
Lord, which alone can raise one to the kingdom of God.

TEXT  10

SahYaja" Pa[Jaa" Sa*îa Pauraevac Pa[JaaPaiTa" )

ANaeNa Pa[SaivZYaßMaez vae_iSTvík-aMaDauk(- )) 10 ))

saha-yajïäù prajäù såñövä
puroväca prajäpatiù
anena prasaviñyadhvam
eña vo ’stv iñöa-käma-dhuk

SYNONYMS

saha—along with; yajïäù—sacrifices; prajäù—generations; såñövä—creating;
purä—anciently; uväca—said; prajä-patiù—the Lord of creatures; anena—by
this; prasaviñyadhvam—be more and more prosperous; eñaù—this; vaù—your;
astu—let it be; iñöa—of all desirable things; käma-dhuk—bestower.

TRANSLATION

In the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth generations

of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Viñëu, and blessed them by
saying, “Be thou happy by this yajïa [sacrifice] because its performance will
bestow upon you everything desirable for living happily and achieving
liberation.”

PURPORT

The material creation by the Lord of creatures (Viñëu) is a chance offered
to  the  conditioned  souls  to  come  back  home—back  to  Godhead.  All  living
entities  within  the  material  creation  are  conditioned  by  material  nature
because  of  their  forgetfulness  of  their  relationship  to  Viñëu,  or  Kåñëa,  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  The  Vedic  principles  are  to  help  us
understand this eternal relation, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä: vedaiç ca
sarvair  aham  eva  vedyaù.  The  Lord  says  that  the  purpose  of  the  Vedas  is  to
understand  Him.  In  the  Vedic  hymns  it  is  said:  patià  viçvasyätmeçvaram.
Therefore,  the  Lord  of  the  living  entities  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  Viñëu.  In  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  also  (2.4.20)  Çréla  Çukadeva
Gosvämé describes the Lord as pati in so many ways:

çriyaù patir yajïa-patiù prajä-patir
dhiyäà patir loka-patir dharä-patiù
patir gatiç cändhaka-våñëi-sätvatäà
prasédatäà me bhagavän satäà patiù

The prajä-pati is Lord Viñëu, and He is the Lord of all living creatures, all
worlds, and all beauties, and the protector of everyone. The Lord created this
material world to enable the conditioned souls to learn how to perform yajïas
(sacrifices)  for  the  satisfaction  of  Viñëu,  so  that  while  in  the  material  world
they can live very comfortably without anxiety and after finishing the present
material  body  they  can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  That  is  the  whole
program  for  the  conditioned  soul.  By  performance  of  yajïa,  the  conditioned

souls  gradually  become  Kåñëa  conscious  and  become  godly  in  all  respects.  In
the  Age  of  Kali,  the  saìkértana-yajïa  (the  chanting  of  the  names  of  God)  is
recommended  by  the  Vedic  scriptures,  and  this  transcendental  system  was
introduced  by  Lord  Caitanya  for  the  deliverance  of  all  men  in  this  age.
Saìkértana-yajïa and Kåñëa consciousness go well together. Lord Kåñëa in His
devotional  form  (as  Lord  Caitanya)  is  mentioned  in  the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(11.5.32) as follows, with special reference to the saìkértana-yajïa:

kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëaà
säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam
yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi su-medhasaù

“In  this  Age  of  Kali,  people  who  are  endowed  with  sufficient  intelligence
will worship the Lord, who is accompanied by His associates, by performance
of  saìkértana-yajïa.”  Other  yajïas prescribed in the Vedic literatures are not
easy  to  perform  in  this  Age  of  Kali,  but  the  saìkértana-yajïa  is  easy  and
sublime for all purposes, as recommended in Bhagavad-gétä also (9.14).

TEXT  11

devaN>aavYaTaaNaeNa Tae deva >aavYaNTau v" )

ParSPar& >aavYaNTa" é[eYa" ParMavaPSYaQa )) 11 ))

devän bhävayatänena
te devä bhävayantu vaù
parasparaà bhävayantaù
çreyaù param aväpsyatha

SYNONYMS

devän—demigods; bhävayatä—having pleased; anena—by this sacrifice;
te—those; deväù—demigods; bhävayantu—will please; vaù—you;
parasparam—mutually; bhävayantaù—pleasing one another;
çreyaù—benediction; param—the supreme; aväpsyatha—you will achieve.

TRANSLATION

The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you, and thus, by

cooperation between men and demigods, prosperity will reign for all.

PURPORT

The demigods are empowered administrators of material affairs. The supply
of  air,  light,  water  and  all  other  benedictions  for  maintaining  the  body  and
soul of every living entity is entrusted to the demigods, who are innumerable
assistants  in  different  parts  of  the  body  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead. Their pleasures and displeasures are dependent on the performance
of  yajïas  by  the  human  being.  Some  of  the  yajïas  are  meant  to  satisfy
particular demigods; but even in so doing, Lord Viñëu is worshiped in all yajïas
as  the  chief  beneficiary.  It  is  stated  also  in  the  Bhagavad-gétä  that  Kåñëa
Himself  is  the  beneficiary  of  all  kinds  of  yajïas:  bhoktäraà  yajïa-tapasäm.
Therefore,  ultimate  satisfaction  of  the  yajïa-pati  is  the  chief  purpose  of  all
yajïas. When these yajïas are perfectly performed, naturally the demigods in
charge  of  the  different  departments  of  supply  are  pleased,  and  there  is  no
scarcity in the supply of natural products.

Performance  of  yajïas  has  many  side  benefits,  ultimately  leading  to
liberation  from  material  bondage.  By  performance  of  yajïas,  all  activities
become  purified,  as  it  is  stated  in  the  Vedas:  ähära-çuddhau  sattva-çuddhiù
sattva-çuddhau  dhruvä  småtiù  småti-lambhe  sarvagranthénäà  vipramokñaù.  By
performance of yajïa one’s eatables become sanctified, and by eating sanctified
foodstuffs  one’s  very  existence  becomes  purified;  by  the  purification  of
existence finer tissues in the memory become sanctified, and when memory is
sanctified  one  can  think  of  the  path  of  liberation,  and  all  these  combined
together  lead  to  Kåñëa  consciousness,  the  great  necessity  of  present-day
society.

TEXT  12

wíaN>aaeGaaiNh vae deva daSYaNTae Yaj>aaivTaa" )

TaEdRtaaNaPa[daYaE>Yaae Yaae >au»e STaeNa Wv Sa" )) 12 ))

iñöän bhogän hi vo devä
däsyante yajïa-bhävitäù
tair dattän apradäyaibhyo
yo bhuìkte stena eva saù

SYNONYMS

iñöän—desired; bhogän—necessities of life; hi—certainly; vaù—unto you;
deväù—the demigods; däsyante—will award; yajïa-bhävitäù—being satisfied by
the performance of sacrifices; taiù—by them; dattän—things given;
apradäya—without offering; ebhyaù—to these demigods; yaù—he who;
bhuìkte—enjoys; stenaù—thief; eva—certainly; saù—he.

TRANSLATION

In charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being satisfied by
the performance of yajïa [sacrifice], will supply all necessities to you. But he
who enjoys such gifts without offering them to the demigods in return is
certainly a thief.

PURPORT

The  demigods  are  authorized  supplying  agents  on  behalf  of  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  Viñëu.  Therefore,  they  must  be  satisfied  by  the
performance  of  prescribed  yajïas.  In  the  Vedas,  there  are  different  kinds  of
yajïas prescribed for different kinds of demigods, but all are ultimately offered
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For one who cannot understand what
the  Personality  of  Godhead  is,  sacrifice  to  the  demigods  is  recommended.
According  to  the  different  material  qualities  of  the  persons  concerned,
different types of yajïas are recommended in the Vedas. Worship of different
demigods  is  also  on  the  same  basis—namely,  according  to  different  qualities.

For  example,  the  meat-eaters  are  recommended  to  worship  the  goddess  Kälé,
the  ghastly  form  of  material  nature,  and  before  the  goddess  the  sacrifice  of
animals is recommended. But for those who are in the mode of goodness, the
transcendental worship of Viñëu is recommended. But ultimately all yajïas are
meant  for  gradual  promotion  to  the  transcendental  position.  For  ordinary
men, at least five yajïas, known as païca-mahä-yajïa, are necessary.

One should know, however, that all the necessities of life that the human
society  requires  are  supplied  by  the  demigod  agents  of  the  Lord.  No  one  can
manufacture  anything.  Take,  for  example,  all  the  eatables  of  human  society.
These  eatables  include  grains,  fruits,  vegetables,  milk,  sugar,  etc.,  for  the
persons in the mode of goodness, and also eatables for the nonvegetarians, like
meats,  none  of  which  can  be  manufactured  by  men.  Then  again,  take  for
example heat, light, water, air, etc., which are also necessities of life—none of
them can be manufactured by the human society. Without the Supreme Lord,
there  can  be  no  profuse  sunlight,  moonlight,  rainfall,  breeze,  etc.,  without
which no one can live. Obviously, our life is dependent on supplies from the
Lord.  Even  for  our  manufacturing  enterprises,  we  require  so  many  raw
materials like metal, sulphur, mercury, manganese, and so many essentials—all
of  which  are  supplied  by  the  agents  of  the  Lord,  with  the  purpose  that  we
should  make  proper  use  of  them  to  keep  ourselves  fit  and  healthy  for  the
purpose  of  self-realization,  leading  to  the  ultimate  goal  of  life,  namely,
liberation from the material struggle for existence. This aim of life is attained
by  performance  of  yajïas.  If  we  forget  the  purpose  of  human  life  and  simply
take  supplies  from  the  agents  of  the  Lord  for  sense  gratification  and  become
more  and  more  entangled  in  material  existence,  which  is  not  the  purpose  of
creation,  certainly  we  become  thieves,  and  therefore  we  are  punished  by  the
laws of material nature. A society of thieves can never be happy, because they
have no aim in life. The gross materialist thieves have no ultimate goal of life.
They are simply directed to sense gratification; nor do they have knowledge of
how  to  perform  yajïas.  Lord  Caitanya,  however,  inaugurated  the  easiest
performance of yajïa, namely the saìkértana-yajïa, which can be performed by
anyone in the world who accepts the principles of Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  13

YajiXaíaiXaNa" SaNTaae MauCYaNTae SavRik-iLbzE"

>auÅTae Tae Tvga& PaaPaa Yae PacNTYaaTMak-ar<aaTa( )) 13 ))

yajïa-çiñöäçinaù santo
mucyante sarva-kilbiñaiù
bhuïjate te tv aghaà päpä
ye pacanty ätma-käraëät

SYNONYMS

yajïa-çiñöa—of food taken after performance of yajïa; açinaù—eaters;
santaù—the devotees; mucyante—get relief; sarva—all kinds of;
kilbiñaiù—from sins; bhuïjate—enjoy; te—they; tu—but; agham—grievous
sins; päpäù—sinners; ye—who; pacanti—prepare food; ätma-käraëät—for
sense enjoyment.

TRANSLATION

The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat

food which is offered first for sacrifice. Others, who prepare food for personal
sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.

PURPORT

in 

described 

The  devotees  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  or  the  persons  who  are  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, are called santas, and they are always in love with the Lord as it
is 
(5.38):
the 
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti. The
santas,  being  always  in  a  compact  of  love  with  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  Govinda  (the  giver  of  all  pleasures),  or  Mukunda  (the  giver  of
liberation),  or  Kåñëa  (the  all-attractive  person),  cannot  accept  anything
without  first  offering  it  to  the  Supreme  Person.  Therefore,  such  devotees

Brahma-saàhitä 

always  perform  yajïas  in  different  modes  of  devotional  service,  such  as
çravaëam,  kértanam,  smaraëam,  arcanam,  etc.,  and  these  performances  of
yajïas  keep  them  always  aloof  from  all  kinds  of  contamination  of  sinful
association  in  the  material  world.  Others,  who  prepare  food  for  self  or  sense
gratification, are not only thieves but also the eaters of all kinds of sins. How
can  a  person  be  happy  if  he  is  both  a  thief  and  sinful?  It  is  not  possible.
Therefore,  in  order  for  people  to  become  happy  in  all  respects,  they  must  be
taught  to  perform  the  easy  process  of  saìkértana-yajïa,  in  full  Kåñëa
consciousness. Otherwise, there can be no peace or happiness in the world.

TEXT  14

AàaÙviNTa >aUTaaiNa PaJaRNYaadàSaM>av" )

YajaÙviTa PaJaRNYaae Yaj" k-MaRSaMauÙv" )) 14 ))

annäd bhavanti bhütäni
parjanyäd anna-sambhavaù
yajïäd bhavati parjanyo
yajïaù karma-samudbhavaù

SYNONYMS

annät—from grains; bhavanti—grow; bhütäni—the material bodies;
parjanyät—from rains; anna—of food grains; sambhavaù—production;
yajïät—from the performance of sacrifice; bhavati—becomes possible;
parjanyaù—rain; yajïaù—performance of yajïa; karma—prescribed duties;
samudbhavaù—born of.

TRANSLATION

All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains.
Rains are produced by performance of yajïa [sacrifice], and yajïa is born of
prescribed duties.

PURPORT

Çréla  Baladeva  Vidyäbhüñaëa,  a  great  commentator  on  the  Bhagavad-gétä,
writes  as  follows:  ye  indrädy-aìgatayävasthitaà  yajïaà  sarveçvaraà  viñëum
abhyarcya  tac-cheñam  açnanti  tena  tad  deha-yäträà  sampädayanti,  te  santaù
sarveçvarasya  yajïa-puruñasya  bhaktäù  sarva-kilbiñair  anädi-käla-vivåddhair
ätmänubhava-prati bandhakair nikhilaiù päpair vimucyante. The Supreme Lord,
who is known as the yajïa-puruña, or the personal beneficiary of all sacrifices,
is the master of all the demigods, who serve Him as the different limbs of the
body serve the whole. Demigods like Indra, Candra and Varuëa are appointed
officers who manage material affairs, and the Vedas direct sacrifices to satisfy
these  demigods  so  that  they  may  be  pleased  to  supply  air,  light  and  water
sufficiently  to  produce  food  grains.  When  Lord  Kåñëa  is  worshiped,  the
demigods,  who  are  different  limbs  of  the  Lord,  are  also  automatically
worshiped;  therefore  there  is  no  separate  need  to  worship  the  demigods.  For
this  reason,  the  devotees  of  the  Lord,  who  are  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  offer
food to Kåñëa and then eat—a process which nourishes the body spiritually. By
such action not only are past sinful reactions in the body vanquished, but the
body becomes immunized to all contamination of material nature. When there
is an epidemic disease, an antiseptic vaccine protects a person from the attack
of such an epidemic. Similarly, food offered to Lord Viñëu and then taken by
us  makes  us  sufficiently  resistant  to  material  affection,  and  one  who  is
accustomed to this practice is called a devotee of the Lord. Therefore, a person
in Kåñëa consciousness, who eats only food offered to Kåñëa, can counteract all
reactions of past material infections, which are impediments to the progress of
self-realization.  On  the  other  hand,  one  who  does  not  do  so  continues  to
increase  the  volume  of  sinful  action,  and  this  prepares  the  next  body  to
resemble  hogs  and  dogs,  to  suffer  the  resultant  reactions  of  all  sins.  The
material  world  is  full  of  contaminations,  and  one  who  is  immunized  by
accepting  prasädam  of  the  Lord  (food  offered  to  Viñëu)  is  saved  from  the
attack, whereas one who does not do so becomes subjected to contamination.

Food  grains  or  vegetables  are  factually  eatables.  The  human  being  eats
different kinds of food grains, vegetables, fruits, etc., and the animals eat the

refuse of the food grains and vegetables, grass, plants, etc. Human beings who
are accustomed to eating meat and flesh must also depend on the production of
vegetation  in  order  to  eat  the  animals.  Therefore,  ultimately,  we  have  to
depend  on  the  production  of  the  field  and  not  on  the  production  of  big
factories. The field production is due to sufficient rain from the sky, and such
rains  are  controlled  by  demigods  like  Indra,  sun,  moon,  etc.,  and  they  are  all
servants  of  the  Lord.  The  Lord  can  be  satisfied  by  sacrifices;  therefore,  one
who  cannot  perform  them  will  find  himself  in  scarcity—that  is  the  law  of
nature.  Yajïa,  specifically  the  saìkértana-yajïa  prescribed  for  this  age,  must
therefore be performed to save us at least from scarcity of food supply.

TEXT  15

k-MaR b]øaeÙv& iviÖ b]øa+arSaMauÙvMa( )

TaSMaaTSavRGaTa& b]ø iNaTYa& Yaje Pa[iTaiïTaMa( )) 15 ))

karma brahmodbhavaà viddhi
brahmäkñara-samudbhavam
tasmät sarva-gataà brahma
nityaà yajïe pratiñöhitam

SYNONYMS

karma—work; brahma—from the Vedas; udbhavam—produced; viddhi—you
should know; brahma—the Vedas; akñara—from the Supreme Brahman
(Personality of Godhead); samudbhavam—directly manifested;
tasmät—therefore; sarva-gatam—all-pervading; brahma—transcendence;
nityam—eternally; yajïe—in sacrifice; pratiñöhitam—situated.

TRANSLATION

Regulated activities are prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas are directly

manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Consequently the
all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated in acts of sacrifice.

PURPORT

Yajïärtha-karma, or the necessity of work for the satisfaction of Kåñëa only,
is more expressly stated in this verse. If we have to work for the satisfaction of
the  yajïa-puruña,  Viñëu,  then  we  must  find  out  the  direction  of  work  in
Brahman,  or  the  transcendental  Vedas.  The  Vedas  are  therefore  codes  of
working directions. Anything performed without the direction of the Vedas is
called  vikarma,  or  unauthorized  or  sinful  work.  Therefore,  one  should  always
take direction from the Vedas to be saved from the reaction of work. As one
has to work in ordinary life by the direction of the state, one similarly has to
work under direction of the supreme state of the Lord. Such directions in the
Vedas  are  directly  manifested  from  the breathing of the Supreme Personality
of  Godhead.  It  is  said,  asya  mahato  bhütasya  niçvasitam  etad  yad  åg-vedo
yajur-vedaù  sämavedo  ’tharväìgirasaù.  “The  four  Vedas—namely the Åg Veda,
Yajur  Veda,  Säma  Veda,  and  Atharva  Veda—are  all  emanations  from  the
breathing  of  the  great  Personality  of  Godhead.”  (Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad
4.5.11)  The  Lord,  being  omnipotent,  can  speak  by  breathing  air,  for  as  it  is
confirmed  in  the  Brahma-saàhitä,  the  Lord  has  the  omnipotence  to  perform
through each of His senses the actions of all other senses. In other words, the
Lord can speak through His breathing, and He can impregnate by His eyes. In
fact, it is said that He glanced over material nature and thus fathered all living
entities. After creating or impregnating the conditioned souls into the womb
of material nature, He gave His directions in the Vedic wisdom as to how such
conditioned  souls  can  return  home,  back  to  Godhead.  We  should  always
remember  that  the  conditioned  souls  in  material  nature  are  all  eager  for
material enjoyment. But the Vedic directions are so made that one can satisfy
one’s perverted desires, then return to Godhead, having finished his so-called
enjoyment.  It  is  a  chance  for  the  conditioned  souls  to  attain  liberation;
therefore  the  conditioned  souls  must  try  to  follow  the  process  of  yajïa  by
becoming  Kåñëa  conscious.  Even  those  who  have  not  followed  the  Vedic
injunctions may adopt the principles of Kåñëa consciousness, and that will take
the place of performance of Vedic yajïas, or karmas.

TEXT  16

Wv& Pa[viTaRTa& c§&- NaaNauvTaRYaTaqh Ya" )

AgaaYauiriNd]YaaraMaae Maaega& PaaQaR Sa JaqviTa )) 16 ))

evaà pravartitaà cakraà
nänuvartayatéha yaù
aghäyur indriyärämo
moghaà pärtha sa jévati

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; pravartitam—established by the Vedas; cakram—cycle; na—does
not; anuvartayati—adopt; iha—in this life; yaù—one who; agha-äyuù—whose
life is full of sins; indriya-ärämaù—satisfied in sense gratification;
mogham—uselessly; pärtha—O son of Påthä (Arjuna); saù—he; jévati—lives.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, one who does not follow in human life the cycle of sacrifice

thus established by the Vedas certainly leads a life full of sin. Living only for
the satisfaction of the senses, such a person lives in vain.

PURPORT

The  mammonist  philosophy  of  “work  very  hard  and  enjoy  sense
gratification” is condemned herein by the Lord. Therefore, for those who want
to enjoy this material world, the above-mentioned cycle of performing yajïas is
absolutely necessary. One who does not follow such regulations is living a very
risky life, being condemned more and more. By nature’s law, this human form
of  life  is  specifically  meant  for  self-realization,  in  either  of  the  three
ways—namely karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. There is no necessity of
rigidly  following  the  performances  of  the  prescribed  yajïas  for  the

transcendentalists  who  are  above  vice  and  virtue;  but  those  who  are  engaged
in  sense  gratification  require  purification  by  the  above  mentioned  cycle  of
yajïa performances. There are different kinds of activities. Those who are not
Kåñëa conscious are certainly engaged in sensory consciousness; therefore they
need  to  execute  pious  work.  The  yajïa  system  is  planned  in  such  a  way  that
sensory  conscious  persons  may  satisfy  their  desires  without  becoming
entangled  in  the  reaction  of  sense-gratificatory  work.  The  prosperity  of  the
world depends not on our own efforts but on the background arrangement of
the Supreme Lord, directly carried out by the demigods. Therefore, the yajïas
are  directly  aimed  at  the  particular  demigods  mentioned  in  the  Vedas.
Indirectly, it is the practice of Kåñëa consciousness, because when one masters
the  performance  of  yajïas  one  is  sure  to  become  Kåñëa  conscious.  But  if  by
performing  yajïas  one  does  not  become  Kåñëa  conscious,  such  principles  are
counted as only moral codes. One should not, therefore, limit his progress only
to  the  point  of  moral  codes,  but  should  transcend  them,  to  attain  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  17

YaSTvaTMariTarev SYaadaTMaTa*áê MaaNav" )

AaTMaNYaev c SaNTauíSTaSYa k-aYa| Na ivÛTae )) 17 ))

yas tv ätma-ratir eva syäd
ätma-tåptaç ca mänavaù
ätmany eva ca santuñöas
tasya käryaà na vidyate

SYNONYMS

yaù—one who; tu—but; ätma-ratiù—taking pleasure in the self;
eva—certainly; syät—remains; ätma-tåptaù—self-illuminated; ca—and;
mänavaù—a man; ätmani—in himself; eva—only; ca—and;
santuñöaù—perfectly satiated; tasya—his; käryam—duty; na—does not;

vidyate—exist.

TRANSLATION

But for one who takes pleasure in the self, whose human life is one of
self-realization, and who is satisfied in the self only, fully satiated—for him
there is no duty.

PURPORT

A  person  who  is  fully  Kåñëa  conscious,  and  is  fully  satisfied  by  his  acts  in
Kåñëa  consciousness,  no  longer  has  any  duty  to  perform.  Due  to  his  being
Kåñëa  conscious,  all  impiety  within  is  instantly  cleansed,  an  effect  of  many,
many thousands of yajïa performances. By such clearing of consciousness, one
becomes  fully  confident  of  his  eternal  position  in  relationship  with  the
Supreme. His duty thus becomes self-illuminated by the grace of the Lord, and
therefore  he  no  longer  has  any  obligations  to  the  Vedic  injunctions.  Such  a
Kåñëa  conscious  person  is  no  longer  interested  in  material  activities  and  no
longer  takes  pleasure  in  material  arrangements  like  wine,  women  and  similar
infatuations.

TEXT  18

NaEv TaSYa k*-TaeNaaQaaeR Naak*-TaeNaeh k-êNa )

Na caSYa SavR>aUTaezu k-iêdQaRVYaPaaé[Ya" )) 18 ))

naiva tasya kåtenärtho
näkåteneha kaçcana
na cäsya sarva-bhüteñu
kaçcid artha-vyapäçrayaù

SYNONYMS

na—never; eva—certainly; tasya—his; kåtena—by discharge of duty;

arthaù—purpose; na—nor; akåtena—without discharge of duty; iha—in this
world; kaçcana—whatever; na—never; ca—and; asya—of him;
sarva-bhüteñu—among all living beings; kaçcit—any; artha—purpose;
vyapäçrayaù—taking shelter of.

TRANSLATION

A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his

prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Nor has he
any need to depend on any other living being.

PURPORT

A  self-realized  man  is  no  longer  obliged  to  perform  any  prescribed  duty,
save  and  except  activities  in  Kåñëa  consciousness. Kåñëa consciousness is not
inactivity  either,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  following  verses.  A  Kåñëa
conscious  man  does  not  take  shelter  of  any  person—man  or  demigod.
Whatever he does in Kåñëa consciousness is sufficient in the discharge of his
obligation.

TEXT  19

TaSMaadSa¢-" SaTaTa& k-aYa| k-MaR SaMaacr )

ASa¢-ae ùacrNk-MaR ParMaaPanaeiTa PaUåz" )) 19 ))

tasmäd asaktaù satataà
käryaà karma samäcara
asakto hy äcaran karma
param äpnoti püruñaù

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; asaktaù—without attachment; satatam—constantly;
käryam—as duty; karma—work; samäcara—perform; asaktaù—unattached;

hi—certainly; äcaran—performing; karma—work; param—the Supreme;
äpnoti—achieves; püruñaù—a man.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one should act

as a matter of duty, for by working without attachment one attains the
Supreme.

PURPORT

The Supreme is the Personality of Godhead for the devotees, and liberation
for  the  impersonalist.  A  person,  therefore,  acting  for  Kåñëa,  or  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, under proper guidance and without attachment to the result of
the work, is certainly making progress toward the supreme goal of life. Arjuna
is told that he should fight in the Battle of Kurukñetra for the interest of Kåñëa
because Kåñëa wanted him to fight. To be a good man or a nonviolent man is a
personal  attachment,  but  to  act  on  behalf  of  the  Supreme  is  to  act  without
attachment  for  the  result.  That  is  perfect  action  of  the  highest  degree,
recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa.

Vedic  rituals,  like  prescribed  sacrifices,  are  performed  for  purification  of
impious  activities  that  were  performed  in  the  field  of  sense  gratification.  But
action in Kåñëa consciousness is transcendental to the reactions of good or evil
work. A Kåñëa conscious person has no attachment for the result but acts on
behalf  of  Kåñëa  alone.  He  engages  in  all kinds of activities, but is completely
nonattached.

TEXT  20

k-MaR<aEv ih Sa&iSaiÖMaaiSQaTaa JaNak-adYa" )

l/aek-Sa°hMaevaiPa SaMPaXYaNk-TauRMahRiSa )) 20 ))

karmaëaiva hi saàsiddhim
ästhitä janakädayaù

loka-saìgraham eväpi
sampaçyan kartum arhasi

SYNONYMS

karmaëä—by work; eva—even; hi—certainly; saàsiddhim—in perfection;
ästhitäù—situated; janaka-ädayaù—Janaka and other kings;
loka-saìgraham—the people in general; eva api—also;
sampaçyan—considering; kartum—to act; arhasi—you deserve.

TRANSLATION

Kings such as Janaka attained perfection solely by performance of prescribed

duties. Therefore, just for the sake of educating the people in general, you
should perform your work.

PURPORT

Kings  like  Janaka  were  all  self-realized  souls;  consequently  they  had  no
obligation  to  perform  the  prescribed  duties  in  the  Vedas.  Nonetheless  they
performed  all  prescribed  activities  just  to  set  examples  for  the  people  in
general.  Janaka  was  the  father  of  Sétä  and  father-in-law  of  Lord  Çré  Räma.
Being  a  great  devotee  of  the  Lord,  he  was  transcendentally  situated,  but
because he was the king of Mithilä (a subdivision of Bihar province in India),
he had to teach his subjects how to perform prescribed duties. Lord Kåñëa and
Arjuna,  the  Lord’s  eternal  friend,  had  no  need  to  fight  in  the  Battle  of
Kurukñetra,  but  they  fought  to  teach  people  in  general  that  violence  is  also
necessary  in  a  situation  where  good  arguments  fail.  Before  the  Battle  of
Kurukñetra,  every  effort  was  made  to  avoid  the  war,  even  by  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  but  the  other  party  was  determined  to  fight.  So  for
such  a  right  cause,  there  is  a  necessity  for  fighting.  Although  one  who  is
situated in Kåñëa consciousness may not have any interest in the world, he still
works to teach the public how to live and how to act. Experienced persons in
Kåñëa consciousness can act in such a way that others will follow, and this is

explained in the following verse.

TEXT  21

YaÛdacriTa é[eïSTatadeveTarae JaNa" )

Sa YaTPa[Maa<a& ku-åTae l/aek-STadNauvTaRTae )) 21 ))

yad yad äcarati çreñöhas
tat tad evetaro janaù
sa yat pramäëaà kurute
lokas tad anuvartate

SYNONYMS

yat yat—whatever; äcarati—he does; çreñöhaù—a respectable leader; tat—that;
tat—and that alone; eva—certainly; itaraù—common; janaù—person;
saù—he; yat—whichever; pramäëam—example; kurute—does perform;
lokaù—all the world; tat—that; anuvartate—follows in the footsteps.

TRANSLATION

Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And whatever

standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues.

PURPORT

People  in  general  always  require  a  leader  who  can  teach  the  public  by
practical  behavior.  A  leader  cannot  teach  the  public  to  stop  smoking  if  he
himself  smokes.  Lord  Caitanya  said  that  a  teacher  should  behave  properly
before he begins teaching. One who teaches in that way is called äcärya, or the
ideal  teacher.  Therefore,  a  teacher  must  follow  the  principles  of  çästra
(scripture) to teach the common man. The teacher cannot manufacture rules
against  the  principles  of  revealed  scriptures.  The  revealed  scriptures,  like
Manu-saàhitä  and  similar  others,  are  considered  the  standard  books  to  be

followed by human society. Thus the leader’s teaching should be based on the
principles  of  such  standard  çästras. One who desires to improve himself must
follow  the  standard  rules  as  they  are  practiced  by  the  great  teachers.  The
Çrémad-Bhägavatam also affirms that one should follow in the footsteps of great
devotees,  and  that  is  the  way  of  progress  on  the  path  of  spiritual  realization.
The king or the executive head of a state, the father and the school teacher are
all considered to be natural leaders of the innocent people in general. All such
natural leaders have a great responsibility to their dependents; therefore they
must be conversant with standard books of moral and spiritual codes.

TEXT  22

Na Mae PaaQaaRiSTa k-TaRVYa& i}azu l/aeke-zu ik-ÄNa )

NaaNavaáMavaáVYa& vTaR Wv c k-MaRi<a )) 22 ))

na me pärthästi kartavyaà
triñu lokeñu kiïcana
nänaväptam aväptavyaà
varta eva ca karmaëi

SYNONYMS

na—not; me—Mine; pärtha—O son of Påthä; asti—there is;
kartavyam—prescribed duty; triñu—in the three; lokeñu—planetary systems;
kiïcana—any; na—nothing; anaväptam—wanted; aväptavyam—to be gained;
varte—I am engaged; eva—certainly; ca—also; karmaëi—in prescribed duty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, there is no work prescribed for Me within all the three
planetary systems. Nor am I in want of anything, nor have I a need to obtain
anything—and yet I am engaged in prescribed duties.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described in the Vedic literatures

as follows:

tam éçvaräëäà paramaà maheçvaraà
taà devatänäà paramaà ca daivatam
patià paténäà paramaà parastäd
vidäma devaà bhuvaneçam éòyam

na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate
na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca

“The Supreme Lord is the controller of all other controllers, and He is the
greatest of all the diverse planetary leaders. Everyone is under His control. All
entities  are  delegated  with  particular  power  only  by  the  Supreme  Lord;  they
are not supreme themselves. He is also worshipable by all demigods and is the
supreme director of all directors. Therefore, He is transcendental to all kinds
of material leaders and controllers and is worshipable by all. There is no one
greater than Him, and He is the supreme cause of all causes.

“He  does  not  possess  bodily  form  like  that  of  an  ordinary  living  entity.
There is no difference between His body and His soul. He is absolute. All His
senses  are  transcendental.  Any  one  of  His  senses  can  perform  the  action  of
any  other  sense.  Therefore,  no one is greater than Him or equal to Him. His
potencies are multifarious, and thus His deeds are automatically performed as a
natural sequence.” (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.7–8)

Since  everything  is  in  full  opulence  in  the  Personality  of  Godhead  and  is
existing in full truth, there is no duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to  perform.  One  who  must  receive  the  results  of  work  has  some  designated
duty, but one who has nothing to achieve within the three planetary systems
certainly  has  no  duty.  And  yet  Lord  Kåñëa  is  engaged  on  the  Battlefield  of
Kurukñetra as the leader of the kñatriyas because the kñatriyas are duty-bound
to give protection to the distressed. Although He is above all the regulations of
the  revealed  scriptures,  He  does  not  do  anything  that  violates  the  revealed

scriptures.

TEXT  23

Yaid ùh& Na vTaeRYa& JaaTau k-MaR<YaTaiNd]Ta" )

MaMa vTMaaRNauvTaRNTae MaNauZYaa" PaaQaR SavRXa" )) 23 ))

yadi hy ahaà na varteyaà
jätu karmaëy atandritaù
mama vartmänuvartante
manuñyäù pärtha sarvaçaù

SYNONYMS

yadi—if; hi—certainly; aham—I; na—do not; varteyam—thus engage;
jätu—ever; karmaëi—in the performance of prescribed duties;
atandritaù—with great care; mama—My; vartma—path; anuvartante—would
follow; manuñyäù—all men; pärtha—O son of Påthä; sarvaçaù—in all respects.

TRANSLATION

For if I ever failed to engage in carefully performing prescribed duties, O

Pärtha, certainly all men would follow My path.

PURPORT

In  order  to  keep  the  balance  of  social  tranquillity  for  progress  in  spiritual
life,  there  are  traditional  family  usages  meant  for  every  civilized  man.
Although  such  rules  and  regulations  are  for  the  conditioned  souls  and  not
Lord  Kåñëa,  because  He  descended  to  establish  the  principles  of  religion  He
followed  the  prescribed  rules.  Otherwise,  common  men  would  follow  in  His
footsteps, because He is the greatest authority. From the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it
is understood that Lord Kåñëa was performing all the religious duties at home
and out of home, as required of a householder.

TEXT  24

oTSaqdeYauirMae l/aek-a Na ku-Yaa| k-MaR cedhMa( )

SaªrSYa c k-TaaR SYaaMauPahNYaaiMaMaa" Pa[Jaa" )) 24 ))

utsédeyur ime lokä
na kuryäà karma ced aham
saìkarasya ca kartä syäm
upahanyäm imäù prajäù

SYNONYMS

utsédeyuù—would be put into ruin; ime—all these; lokäù—worlds; na—not;
kuryäm—I perform; karma—prescribed duties; cet—if; aham—I;
saìkarasya—of unwanted population; ca—and; kartä—creator; syäm—would
be; upahanyäm—would destroy; imäù—all these; prajäù—living entities.

TRANSLATION

If I did not perform prescribed duties, all these worlds would be put to
ruination. I would be the cause of creating unwanted population, and I would
thereby destroy the peace of all living beings.

PURPORT

Varëa-saìkara  is  unwanted  population  which  disturbs  the  peace  of  the
general society. In order to check this social disturbance, there are prescribed
rules  and  regulations  by  which  the  population  can  automatically  become
peaceful  and  organized  for  spiritual  progress  in  life.  When  Lord  Kåñëa
descends,  naturally  He  deals  with  such  rules  and  regulations  in  order  to
maintain the prestige and necessity of such important performances. The Lord
is  the  father  of  all  living  entities,  and  if  the  living  entities  are  misguided,
indirectly  the  responsibility  goes  to  the  Lord.  Therefore,  whenever  there  is

general  disregard  of  regulative  principles,  the  Lord  Himself  descends  and
corrects the society. We should, however, note carefully that although we have
to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  Lord,  we  still  have  to  remember  that  we
cannot  imitate  Him.  Following  and  imitating  are  not  on  the  same  level.  We
cannot  imitate  the  Lord  by  lifting  Govardhana  Hill,  as  the  Lord  did  in  His
childhood.  It  is  impossible  for  any  human  being.  We  have  to  follow  His
instructions, but we may not imitate Him at any time. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(10.33.30–31) affirms:

naitat samäcarej jätu
manasäpi hy anéçvaraù
vinaçyaty äcaran mauòhyäd
yathä ’rudro ’bdhi-jaà viñam

éçvaräëäà vacaù satyaà
tathaiväcaritaà kvacit
teñäà yat sva-vaco-yuktaà
buddhimäàs tat samäcaret

“One should simply follow the instructions of the Lord and His empowered
servants. Their instructions are all good for us, and any intelligent person will
perform  them  as  instructed.  However,  one  should  guard  against  trying  to
imitate  their  actions.  One  should  not  try  to  drink  the  ocean  of  poison  in
imitation of Lord Çiva.”

We  should  always  consider  the  position  of  the  éçvaras,  or  those  who  can
actually  control  the  movements  of  the  sun  and  moon,  as  superior.  Without
such power, one cannot imitate the éçvaras, who are superpowerful. Lord Çiva
drank  poison  to  the  extent  of  swallowing  an  ocean,  but  if  any  common  man
tries to drink even a fragment of such poison, he will be killed. There are many
pseudo  devotees  of  Lord  Çiva  who  want  to  indulge  in  smoking  gaïjä
(marijuana) and similar intoxicating drugs, forgetting that by so imitating the
acts  of  Lord  Çiva  they  are  calling  death  very  near.  Similarly,  there  are  some
pseudo devotees of Lord Kåñëa who prefer to imitate the Lord in His räsa-lélä,
or  dance  of  love,  forgetting  their  inability  to  lift  Govardhana  Hill.  It  is  best,
therefore,  that  one  not  try  to  imitate  the  powerful,  but  simply  follow  their

instructions;  nor  should  one  try  to  occupy  their  posts  without  qualification.
There  are  so  many  “incarnations”  of  God  without  the  power  of  the  Supreme
Godhead.

TEXT  25

Sa¢-a" k-MaR<YaivÜa&Saae YaQaa ku-vRiNTa >aarTa )

ku-YaaRiÜÜa&STaQaaSa¢-iêk-IzuRl/aeRk-Sa°hMa( )) 25 ))

saktäù karmaëy avidväàso
yathä kurvanti bhärata
kuryäd vidväàs tathäsaktaç
cikérñur loka-saìgraham

SYNONYMS

saktäù—being attached; karmaëi—in prescribed duties; avidväàsaù—the
ignorant; yathä—as much as; kurvanti—they do; bhärata—O descendant of
Bharata; kuryät—must do; vidvän—the learned; tathä—thus;
asaktaù—without attachment; cikérñuù—desiring to lead;
loka-saìgraham—the people in general.

TRANSLATION

As the ignorant perform their duties with attachment to results, the learned
may similarly act, but without attachment, for the sake of leading people on the
right path.

PURPORT

A person in Kåñëa consciousness and a person not in Kåñëa consciousness
are  differentiated  by  different  desires.  A  Kåñëa  conscious  person  does  not  do
anything  which  is  not  conducive  to  development  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  He
may  even  act  exactly  like  the  ignorant  person,  who  is  too  much  attached  to

material activities, but one is engaged in such activities for the satisfaction of
his  sense  gratification,  whereas  the  other  is  engaged  for  the  satisfaction  of
Kåñëa.  Therefore,  the  Kåñëa  conscious  person  is  required  to  show  the  people
how  to  act  and  how  to  engage  the  results  of  action  for  the  purpose  of  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  26

Na buiÖ>aed& JaNaYaedjaNaa& k-MaRSai®NaaMa( )

JaaezYaeTSavRk-MaaRi<a ivÜaNYau¢-" SaMaacrNa( )) 26 ))

na buddhi-bhedaà janayed
ajïänäà karma-saìginäm
joñayet sarva-karmäëi
vidvän yuktaù samäcaran

SYNONYMS

na—not; buddhi-bhedam—disruption of intelligence; janayet—he should
cause; ajïänäm—of the foolish; karma-saìginäm—who are attached to fruitive
work; joñayet—he should dovetail; sarva—all; karmäëi—work; vidvän—a
learned person; yuktaù—engaged; samäcaran—practicing.

TRANSLATION

So as not to disrupt the minds of ignorant men attached to the fruitive
results of prescribed duties, a learned person should not induce them to stop
work. Rather, by working in the spirit of devotion, he should engage them in all
sorts of activities [for the gradual development of Kåñëa consciousness].

PURPORT

Vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù. That is the end of all Vedic rituals. All
rituals,  all  performances  of  sacrifices,  and  everything  that  is  put  into  the

including  all  direction  for  material  activities,  are  meant  for
Vedas, 
understanding  Kåñëa,  who  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  life.  But  because  the
conditioned souls do not know anything beyond sense gratification, they study
the  Vedas  to  that  end.  But  through  fruitive  activities  and  sense  gratification
regulated by the Vedic rituals one is gradually elevated to Kåñëa consciousness.
Therefore a realized soul in Kåñëa consciousness should not disturb others in
their activities or understanding, but he should act by showing how the results
of  all  work  can  be  dedicated  to  the  service  of  Kåñëa.  The  learned  Kåñëa
conscious person may act in such a way that the ignorant person working for
sense  gratification  may  learn  how  to  act  and  how  to  behave.  Although  the
ignorant man is not to be disturbed in his activities, a slightly developed Kåñëa
conscious  person  may  directly  be  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  without
waiting  for  other  Vedic  formulas.  For  this  fortunate  man  there  is  no  need  to
follow  the  Vedic  rituals,  because  by  direct Kåñëa consciousness one can have
all  the  results  one  would  otherwise  derive  from  following  one’s  prescribed
duties.

TEXT  27

Pa[k*-Tae" i§-YaMaa<aaiNa Gau<aE" k-MaaRi<a SavRXa" )

AhªarivMaU!aTMaa k-TaaRhiMaiTa MaNYaTae )) 27 ))

prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate

SYNONYMS

prakåteù—of material nature; kriyamäëäni—being done; guëaiù—by the
modes; karmäëi—activities; sarvaçaù—all kinds of;
ahaìkära-vimüòha—bewildered by false ego; ätmä—the spirit soul;
kartä—doer; aham—I; iti—thus; manyate—he thinks.

TRANSLATION

The spirit soul bewildered by the influence of false ego thinks himself the
doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by the three modes of material
nature.

PURPORT

Two  persons,  one  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  the  other  in  material
consciousness,  working  on  the  same  level,  may  appear  to  be  working  on  the
same  platform,  but  there  is  a  wide  gulf  of  difference  in  their  respective
positions. The person in material consciousness is convinced by false ego that
he  is  the  doer  of  everything.  He  does  not  know  that  the  mechanism  of  the
body is produced by material nature, which works under the supervision of the
Supreme Lord. The materialistic person has no knowledge that ultimately he is
under the control of Kåñëa. The person in false ego takes all credit for doing
everything independently, and that is the symptom of his nescience. He does
not  know  that  this  gross  and  subtle  body  is  the  creation  of  material  nature,
under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as such his bodily
and  mental  activities  should  be  engaged  in  the  service  of  Kåñëa,  in  Kåñëa
consciousness.  The  ignorant  man  forgets  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead  is  known  as  Håñékeça,  or  the  master  of  the  senses  of  the  material
body,  for  due  to  his  long  misuse  of  the  senses  in  sense  gratification,  he  is
factually  bewildered  by  the  false  ego,  which  makes  him  forget  his  eternal
relationship with Kåñëa.

TEXT  28

Tatvivtau Mahabahae Gau<ak-MaRiv>aaGaYaae" )

Gau<aa Gau<aezu vTaRNTa wiTa MaTva Na SaÂTae )) 28 ))

tattva-vit tu mahä-bäho
guëa-karma-vibhägayoù

guëä guëeñu vartanta
iti matvä na sajjate

SYNONYMS

tattva-vit—the knower of the Absolute Truth; tu—but; mahä-bäho—O
mighty-armed one; guëa-karma—of works under material influence;
vibhägayoù—differences; guëäù—senses; guëeñu—in sense gratification;
vartante—are being engaged; iti—thus; matvä—thinking; na—never;
sajjate—becomes attached.

TRANSLATION

One who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, O mighty-armed, does not

engage himself in the senses and sense gratification, knowing well the
differences between work in devotion and work for fruitive results.

PURPORT

The knower of the Absolute Truth is convinced of his awkward position in
material  association.  He  knows  that  he  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  and  that  his  position  should  not  be  in  the
material  creation.  He  knows  his  real  identity  as  part  and  parcel  of  the
Supreme, who is eternal bliss and knowledge, and he realizes that somehow or
other  he  is  entrapped  in  the  material  conception  of  life.  In  his  pure  state  of
existence  he  is  meant  to  dovetail  his  activities  in  devotional  service  to  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. He therefore engages himself in the
activities  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  becomes  naturally  unattached  to  the
activities  of  the  material  senses,  which  are  all  circumstantial  and  temporary.
He  knows  that  his  material  condition  of  life  is  under  the  supreme  control  of
the  Lord;  consequently  he  is  not  disturbed  by  all  kinds  of  material  reactions,
which  he  considers  to  be  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  According  to
Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  one  who  knows  the  Absolute  Truth  in  three  different
features—namely  Brahman,  Paramätmä,  and  the  Supreme  Personality  of

Godhead—is  called  tattva-vit,  for  he  knows  also  his  own  factual  position  in
relationship with the Supreme.

TEXT  29

Pa[k*-TaeGauR<aSaMMaU!a" SaÂNTae Gau<ak-MaRSau )

TaaNak*-Tòivdae MaNdaNk*-Tòivà ivcal/YaeTa( )) 29 ))

prakåter guëa-sammüòhäù
sajjante guëa-karmasu
tän akåtsna-vido mandän
kåtsna-vin na vicälayet

SYNONYMS

prakåteù—of material nature; guëa—by the modes; sammüòhäù—befooled by
material identification; sajjante—they become engaged; guëa-karmasu—in
material activities; tän—those; akåtsna-vidaù—persons with a poor fund of
knowledge; mandän—lazy to understand self-realization; kåtsna-vit—one who
is in factual knowledge; na—not; vicälayet—should try to agitate.

TRANSLATION

Bewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage

themselves in material activities and become attached. But the wise should not
unsettle them, although these duties are inferior due to the performers’ lack of
knowledge.

PURPORT

Persons  who  are  unknowledgeable  falsely  identify  with  gross  material
consciousness  and  are  full  of  material  designations.  This  body  is  a  gift  of  the
material nature, and one who is too much attached to the bodily consciousness
is called manda, or a lazy person without understanding of spirit soul. Ignorant

men think of the body as the self; they accept bodily connections with others
as  kinsmanship,  the  land  in  which  the  body  is  obtained  is  their  object  of
worship,  and  they  consider  the  formalities  of  religious  rituals  to  be  ends  in
themselves. Social work, nationalism and altruism are some of the activities for
such materially designated persons. Under the spell of such designations, they
are  always  busy  in  the  material  field;  for  them  spiritual  realization  is  a  myth,
and  so  they  are  not  interested.  Those  who  are  enlightened  in  spiritual  life,
however, should not try to agitate such materially engrossed persons. Better to
prosecute one’s own spiritual activities silently. Such bewildered persons may
be engaged in such primary moral principles of life as nonviolence and similar
materially benevolent work.

Men who are ignorant cannot appreciate activities in Kåñëa consciousness,
and  therefore  Lord  Kåñëa  advises  us  not  to  disturb  them  and  simply  waste
valuable  time.  But  the  devotees  of  the  Lord  are  more  kind  than  the  Lord
because  they  understand  the  purpose  of  the  Lord.  Consequently  they
undertake all kinds of risks, even to the point of approaching ignorant men to
try  to  engage  them  in  the  acts  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  which  are  absolutely
necessary for the human being.

TEXT  30

MaiYa SavaRi<a k-MaaRi<a SaNNYaSYaaDYaaTMaceTaSaa )

iNaraXaqiNaRMaRMaae >aUTva YauDYaSv ivGaTaJvr" )) 30 ))

mayi sarväëi karmäëi
sannyasyädhyätma-cetasä
niräçér nirmamo bhütvä
yudhyasva vigata-jvaraù

SYNONYMS

mayi—unto Me; sarväëi—all sorts of; karmäëi—activities; sannyasya—giving
up completely; adhyätma—with full knowledge of the self; cetasä—by

consciousness; niräçéù—without desire for profit; nirmamaù—without
ownership; bhütvä—so being; yudhyasva—fight; vigata-jvaraù—without being
lethargic.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O Arjuna, surrendering all your works unto Me, with full
knowledge of Me, without desires for profit, with no claims to proprietorship,
and free from lethargy, fight.

PURPORT

This  verse  clearly  indicates  the  purpose  of  the  Bhagavad-gétä.  The  Lord
instructs that one has to become fully Kåñëa conscious to discharge duties, as if
in  military  discipline.  Such  an  injunction  may  make  things  a  little  difficult;
nevertheless  duties  must  be  carried  out,  with  dependence  on  Kåñëa,  because
that is the constitutional position of the living entity. The living entity cannot
be  happy  independent  of  the  cooperation  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  because  the
eternal constitutional position of the living entity is to become subordinate to
the desires of the Lord. Arjuna was therefore ordered by Çré Kåñëa to fight as if
the Lord were his military commander. One has to sacrifice everything for the
good  will  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  and  at  the  same  time  discharge  prescribed
duties  without  claiming  proprietorship.  Arjuna  did  not  have  to  consider  the
order of the Lord; he had only to execute His order. The Supreme Lord is the
soul of all souls; therefore, one who depends solely and wholly on the Supreme
Soul without personal consideration, or in other words, one who is fully Kåñëa
conscious,  is  called  adhyätma-cetas.  Niräçéù  means  that  one  has  to  act  on  the
order  of  the  master  but  should  not  expect  fruitive  results.  The  cashier  may
count  millions  of  dollars  for  his  employer,  but  he  does  not  claim  a  cent  for
himself. Similarly, one has to realize that nothing in the world belongs to any
individual  person,  but  that  everything  belongs  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  That  is
the  real  purport  of  mayi,  or  “unto  Me.”  And  when  one  acts  in  such  Kåñëa
consciousness, certainly he does not claim proprietorship over anything. This
consciousness  is  called  nirmama,  or  “nothing  is  mine.”  And  if  there  is  any

reluctance  to  execute  such  a  stern  order,  which  is  without  consideration  of
so-called kinsmen in the bodily relationship, that reluctance should be thrown
off; in this way one may become vigata-jvara, or without feverish mentality or
lethargy. Everyone, according to his quality and position, has a particular type
of  work  to  discharge,  and  all  such  duties  may  be  discharged  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, as described above. That will lead one to the path of liberation.

TEXT  31

Yae Mae MaTaiMad& iNaTYaMaNauiTaïiNTa MaaNava" )

é[ÖavNTaae_NaSaUYaNTaae MauCYaNTae Tae_iPa k-MaRi>a" )) 31 ))

ye me matam idaà nityam
anutiñöhanti mänaväù
çraddhävanto ’nasüyanto
mucyante te ’pi karmabhiù

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; me—My; matam—injunctions; idam—these; nityam—as an
eternal function; anutiñöhanti—execute regularly; mänaväù—human beings;
çraddhä-vantaù—with faith and devotion; anasüyantaù—without envy;
mucyante—become free; te—all of them; api—even; karmabhiù—from the
bondage of the law of fruitive actions.

TRANSLATION

Those persons who execute their duties according to My injunctions and

who follow this teaching faithfully, without envy, become free from the
bondage of fruitive actions.

PURPORT

The  injunction  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  is  the

essence of all Vedic wisdom and therefore is eternally true without exception.
As the Vedas are eternal, so this truth of Kåñëa consciousness is also eternal.
One  should  have  firm  faith  in  this  injunction,  without  envying  the  Lord.
There  are  many  philosophers  who  write  comments  on  the  Bhagavad-gétä  but
have  no  faith  in  Kåñëa.  They  will  never  be  liberated  from  the  bondage  of
fruitive action. But an ordinary man with firm faith in the eternal injunctions
of  the  Lord,  even  though  unable  to  execute  such  orders,  becomes  liberated
from  the  bondage  of  the  law  of  karma.  In  the  beginning  of  Kåñëa
consciousness,  one  may  not  fully  discharge  the  injunctions  of  the  Lord,  but
because  one  is  not  resentful  of  this  principle  and  works  sincerely  without
consideration  of  defeat  and  hopelessness,  he  will  surely  be  promoted  to  the
stage of pure Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  32

Yae TveTad>YaSaUYaNTaae NaaNauiTaïiNTa Mae MaTaMa( )

SavRjaNaivMaU!a&STaaiNviÖ NaíaNaceTaSa" )) 32 ))

ye tv etad abhyasüyanto
nänutiñöhanti me matam
sarva-jïäna-vimüòhäàs tän
viddhi nañöän acetasaù

SYNONYMS

ye—those; tu—however; etat—this; abhyasüyantaù—out of envy; na—do not;
anutiñöhanti—regularly perform; me—My; matam—injunction;
sarva-jïäna—in all sorts of knowledge; vimüòhän—perfectly befooled;
tän—they are; viddhi—know it well; nañöän—all ruined; acetasaù—without
Kåñëa consciousness.

TRANSLATION

But those who, out of envy, disregard these teachings and do not follow

them are to be considered bereft of all knowledge, befooled, and ruined in their
endeavors for perfection.

PURPORT

The flaw of not being Kåñëa conscious is clearly stated herein. As there is
punishment  for  disobedience  to  the  order  of  the  supreme  executive  head,  so
there  is  certainly  punishment  for  disobedience  to  the  order  of  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  A  disobedient  person,  however  great  he  may  be,  is
ignorant  of  his  own  self,  and  of  the  Supreme  Brahman,  Paramätmä  and  the
Personality of Godhead, due to a vacant heart. Therefore there is no hope of
perfection of life for him.

TEXT  33

Sad*Xa& ceíTae SvSYaa" Pa[k*-TaejaRNavaNaiPa )

Pa[k*-iTa& YaaiNTa >aUTaaiNa iNaGa]h" ik&- k-irZYaiTa )) 33 ))

sadåçaà ceñöate svasyäù
prakåter jïänavän api
prakåtià yänti bhütäni
nigrahaù kià kariñyati

SYNONYMS

sadåçam—accordingly; ceñöate—tries; svasyäù—by his own; prakåteù—modes
of nature; jïäna-vän—learned; api—although; prakåtim—nature;
yänti—undergo; bhütäni—all living entities; nigrahaù—repression;
kim—what; kariñyati—can do.

TRANSLATION

Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for everyone
follows the nature he has acquired from the three modes. What can repression

accomplish?

PURPORT

Unless  one 

is  situated  on  the  transcendental  platform  of  Kåñëa
consciousness, he cannot get free from the influence of the modes of material
nature,  as  it  is  confirmed  by  the  Lord  in  the  Seventh  Chapter  (7.14).
Therefore, even for the most highly educated person on the mundane plane, it
is  impossible  to  get  out  of  the  entanglement  of  mäyä  simply  by  theoretical
knowledge, or by separating the soul from the body. There are many so-called
spiritualists  who  outwardly  pose  as  advanced  in  the  science  but  inwardly  or
privately  are  completely  under  particular  modes  of  nature  which  they  are
unable  to  surpass.  Academically,  one  may  be  very  learned,  but  because  of  his
long  association  with  material  nature,  he  is  in  bondage.  Kåñëa  consciousness
helps  one  to  get  out  of  the  material  entanglement,  even  though  one  may  be
engaged  in  his  prescribed  duties  in  terms  of  material  existence.  Therefore,
without  being  fully  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  should  not  give  up  his
occupational duties. No one should suddenly give up his prescribed duties and
become  a  so-called  yogé  or  transcendentalist  artificially.  It  is  better  to  be
situated  in  one’s  position  and  to  try  to  attain  Kåñëa  consciousness  under
superior training. Thus one may be freed from the clutches of Kåñëa’s mäyä.

TEXT  34

wiNd]YaSYaeiNd]YaSYaaQaeR raGaÜezaE VYaviSQaTaaE )

TaYaaeNaR vXaMaaGaC^etaaE ùSYa PairPaiNQaNaaE )) 34 ))

indriyasyendriyasyärthe
räga-dveñau vyavasthitau
tayor na vaçam ägacchet
tau hy asya paripanthinau

SYNONYMS

indriyasya—of the senses; indriyasya arthe—in the sense objects;
räga—attachment; dveñau—also detachment; vyavasthitau—put under
regulations; tayoù—of them; na—never; vaçam—control; ägacchet—one
should come; tau—those; hi—certainly; asya—his; paripanthinau—stumbling
blocks.

TRANSLATION

There are principles to regulate attachment and aversion pertaining to the

senses and their objects. One should not come under the control of such
attachment and aversion, because they are stumbling blocks on the path of
self-realization.

PURPORT

Those who are in Kåñëa consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage in
material  sense  gratification.  But  those  who  are  not  in  such  consciousness
should follow the rules and regulations of the revealed scriptures. Unrestricted
sense enjoyment is the cause of material encagement, but one who follows the
rules and regulations of the revealed scriptures does not become entangled by
the  sense  objects.  For  example,  sex  enjoyment  is  a  necessity  for  the
conditioned soul, and sex enjoyment is allowed under the license of marriage
ties.  According  to  scriptural  injunctions,  one  is  forbidden  to  engage  in  sex
relationships with any women other than one’s wife. All other women are to
be considered as one’s mother. But in spite of such injunctions, a man is still
inclined to have sex relationships with other women. These propensities are to
be  curbed;  otherwise  they  will  be  stumbling  blocks  on  the  path  of
self-realization.  As  long  as  the  material  body  is  there,  the  necessities  of  the
material body are allowed, but under rules and regulations. And yet, we should
not rely upon the control of such allowances. One has to follow those rules and
regulations, unattached to them, because practice of sense gratification under
regulations  may  also  lead  one  to  go  astray—as  much  as  there  is  always  the
chance  of  an  accident,  even  on  the  royal  roads.  Although  they  may  be  very
carefully maintained, no one can guarantee that there will be no danger even

on  the  safest  road.  The  sense  enjoyment  spirit  has  been  current  a  very  long,
long time, owing to material association. Therefore, in spite of regulated sense
enjoyment,  there  is  every  chance  of  falling  down;  therefore  any  attachment
for  regulated  sense  enjoyment  must  also  be  avoided  by  all  means.  But
attachment  to  Kåñëa  consciousness,  or  acting  always  in  the  loving  service  of
Kåñëa,  detaches  one  from  all  kinds  of  sensory  activities.  Therefore,  no  one
should  try  to  be  detached  from  Kåñëa  consciousness  at  any  stage  of  life.  The
whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of sense attachment is ultimately
to become situated on the platform of Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  35

é[eYaaNSvDaMaaeR ivGau<a" ParDaMaaRTSvNauiïTaaTa( )

SvDaMaeR iNaDaNa& é[eYa" ParDaMaaeR >aYaavh" )) 35 ))

çreyän sva-dharmo viguëaù
para-dharmät sv-anuñöhität
sva-dharme nidhanaà çreyaù
para-dharmo bhayävahaù

SYNONYMS

çreyän—far better; sva-dharmaù—one’s prescribed duties; viguëaù—even
faulty; para-dharmät—than duties mentioned for others;
su-anuñöhität—perfectly done; sva-dharme—in one’s prescribed duties;
nidhanam—destruction; çreyaù—better; para-dharmaù—duties prescribed for
others; bhaya-ävahaù—dangerous.

TRANSLATION

It is far better to discharge one’s prescribed duties, even though faultily,
than another’s duties perfectly. Destruction in the course of performing one’s
own duty is better than engaging in another’s duties, for to follow another’s
path is dangerous.

PURPORT

One  should  therefore  discharge  his  prescribed  duties  in  full  Kåñëa
consciousness  rather  than  those  prescribed  for  others.  Materially,  prescribed
duties are duties enjoined according to one’s psychophysical condition, under
the spell of the modes of material nature. Spiritual duties are as ordered by the
spiritual master for the transcendental service of Kåñëa. But whether material
or spiritual, one should stick to his prescribed duties even up to death, rather
than imitate another’s prescribed duties. Duties on the spiritual platform and
duties on the material platform may be different, but the principle of following
the authorized direction is always good for the performer. When one is under
the  spell  of  the  modes  of  material  nature,  one  should  follow  the  prescribed
rules for his particular situation and should not imitate others. For example, a
brähmaëa,  who  is  in  the  mode  of  goodness,  is  nonviolent,  whereas  a  kñatriya,
who is in the mode of passion, is allowed to be violent. As such, for a kñatriya it
is  better  to  be  vanquished  following  the  rules  of  violence  than  to  imitate  a
brähmaëa who follows the principles of nonviolence. Everyone has to cleanse
his  heart  by  a  gradual  process,  not  abruptly.  However,  when  one  transcends
the  modes  of  material  nature  and  is  fully  situated  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  he
can  perform  anything  and  everything  under  the  direction  of  a  bona  fide
spiritual  master.  In  that  complete  stage  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  the  kñatriya
may  act  as  a  brähmaëa,  or  a  brähmaëa  may  act  as  a  kñatriya.  In  the
transcendental stage, the distinctions of the material world do not apply. For
example,  Viçvämitra  was  originally  a  kñatriya,  but  later  on  he  acted  as  a
brähmaëa,  whereas  Paraçuräma  was  a  brähmaëa  but  later  on  he  acted  as  a
kñatriya. Being transcendentally situated, they could do so; but as long as one is
on the material platform, he must perform his duties according to the modes of
material  nature.  At  the  same  time,  he  must  have  a  full  sense  of  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  36

AJauRNa ovac

AQa ke-Na Pa[Yau¢-ae_Ya& PaaPa& criTa PaUåz" )

AiNaC^àiPa vaZ<aeRYa bl/aidv iNaYaaeiJaTa" )) 36 ))

arjuna uväca
atha kena prayukto ’yaà
päpaà carati püruñaù
anicchann api värñëeya
baläd iva niyojitaù

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; atha—then; kena—by what;
prayuktaù—impelled; ayam—one; päpam—sins; carati—does; püruñaù—a
man; anicchan—without desiring; api—although; värñëeya—O descendant of
Våñëi; balät—by force; iva—as if; niyojitaù—engaged.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O descendant of Våñëi, by what is one impelled to sinful acts,

even unwillingly, as if engaged by force?

PURPORT

A  living  entity,  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  Supreme,  is  originally  spiritual,
pure, and free from all material contaminations. Therefore, by nature he is not
subject  to  the  sins  of  the  material  world.  But  when  he  is  in  contact  with  the
material nature, he acts in many sinful ways without hesitation, and sometimes
even against his will. As such, Arjuna’s question to Kåñëa is very sanguine, as
to  the  perverted  nature  of  the  living  entities.  Although  the  living  entity
sometimes does not want to act in sin, he is still forced to act. Sinful actions
are  not,  however,  impelled  by  the  Supersoul  within,  but  are  due  to  another
cause, as the Lord explains in the next verse.

TEXT  37

é[q>aGavaNauvac

k-aMa Wz §-aeDa Wz rJaaeGau<aSaMauÙv" )

MahaXaNaae MahaPaaPMaa ivÖyeNaiMah vEir<aMa( )) 37 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
käma eña krodha eña
rajo-guëa-samudbhavaù
mahäçano mahä-päpmä
viddhy enam iha vairiëam

SYNONYMS

çri-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; kämaù—lust;
eñaù—this; krodhaù—wrath; eñaù—this; rajaù-guëa—the mode of passion;
samudbhavaù—born of; mahä-açanaù—all-devouring; mahä-päpmä—greatly
sinful; viddhi—know; enam—this; iha—in the material world;
vairiëam—greatest enemy.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is

born of contact with the material mode of passion and later transformed into
wrath, and which is the all-devouring sinful enemy of this world.

PURPORT

When  a  living  entity  comes  in  contact  with  the  material  creation,  his
eternal love for Kåñëa is transformed into lust, in association with the mode of
passion. Or, in other words, the sense of love of God becomes transformed into
lust,  as  milk  in  contact  with  sour  tamarind  is  transformed  into  yogurt.  Then
again,  when  lust  is  unsatisfied,  it  turns into wrath; wrath is transformed into
illusion,  and  illusion  continues  the  material  existence.  Therefore,  lust  is  the

greatest enemy of the living entity, and it is lust only which induces the pure
living  entity  to  remain  entangled  in  the  material  world.  Wrath  is  the
manifestation  of  the  mode  of  ignorance;  these  modes  exhibit  themselves  as
wrath and other corollaries. If, therefore, the mode of passion, instead of being
degraded  into  the  mode  of  ignorance,  is elevated to the mode of goodness by
the  prescribed  method  of  living  and  acting,  then  one  can  be  saved  from  the
degradation of wrath by spiritual attachment.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead expanded Himself into many for His
ever-increasing  spiritual  bliss,  and  the  living  entities  are  parts  and  parcels  of
this spiritual bliss. They also have partial independence, but by misuse of their
independence, when the service attitude is transformed into the propensity for
sense  enjoyment,  they  come  under  the  sway  of  lust.  This  material  creation  is
created  by  the  Lord  to  give  facility  to  the  conditioned  souls  to  fulfill  these
lustful  propensities,  and  when  completely  baffled  by  prolonged  lustful
activities, the living entities begin to inquire about their real position.

This  inquiry  is  the  beginning  of  the  Vedänta-sütras,  wherein  it  is  said,
athäto brahma jijïäsä: one should inquire into the Supreme. And the Supreme
is  defined  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  as  janmädy  asya  yato  ’nvayäd  itarataç  ca, or,
“The  origin  of  everything  is  the  Supreme  Brahman.”  Therefore  the  origin  of
lust is also in the Supreme. If, therefore, lust is transformed into love for the
Supreme,  or  transformed  into  Kåñëa  consciousness—or,  in  other  words,
desiring everything for Kåñëa—then both lust and wrath can be spiritualized.
Hanumän, the great servitor of Lord Räma, exhibited his wrath by burning the
golden city of Rävaëa, but by doing so he became the greatest devotee of the
Lord. Here also, in Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord induces Arjuna to engage his wrath
upon  his  enemies  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Lord.  Therefore,  lust  and  wrath,
when they are employed in Kåñëa consciousness, become our friends instead of
our enemies.

TEXT  38

DaUMaeNaaiv]YaTae viöYaRQaadXaaeR Male/Na c )

YaQaaeLbeNaav*Taae Ga>aRSTaQaa TaeNaedMaav*TaMa( )) 38 ))

dhümenävriyate vahnir
yathädarço malena ca
yatholbenävåto garbhas
tathä tenedam ävåtam

SYNONYMS

dhümena—by smoke; ävriyate—is covered; vahniù—fire; yathä—just as;
ädarçaù—mirror; malena—by dust; ca—also; yathä—just as; ulbena—by the
womb; ävåtaù—is covered; garbhaù—embryo; tathä—so; tena—by that lust;
idam—this; ävåtam—is covered.

TRANSLATION

As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the embryo

is covered by the womb, the living entity is similarly covered by different
degrees of this lust.

PURPORT

is  but 

is  obscured.  This  covering 

There are three degrees of covering of the living entity by which his pure
consciousness 
lust  under  different
manifestations like smoke in the fire, dust on the mirror, and the womb about
the embryo. When lust is compared to smoke, it is understood that the fire of
the  living  spark  can  be  a  little  perceived.  In  other  words,  when  the  living
entity exhibits his Kåñëa consciousness slightly, he may be likened to the fire
covered by smoke. Although fire is necessary where there is smoke, there is no
overt manifestation of fire in the early stage. This stage is like the beginning of
Kåñëa  consciousness.  The  dust  on  the  mirror  refers  to  a  cleansing  process  of
the  mirror  of  the  mind  by  so  many  spiritual  methods.  The  best  process  is  to
chant  the  holy  names  of  the  Lord.  The  embryo  covered  by  the  womb  is  an
analogy illustrating a helpless position, for the child in the womb is so helpless

that he cannot even move. This stage of living condition can be compared to
that of the trees. The trees are also living entities, but they have been put in
such a condition of life by such a great exhibition of lust that they are almost
void  of  all  consciousness.  The  covered  mirror  is  compared  to  the  birds  and
beasts,  and  the  smoke-covered  fire  is  compared  to  the  human  being.  In  the
form  of  a  human  being,  the  living  entity  may  revive  a  little  Kåñëa
consciousness,  and,  if  he  makes  further  development,  the  fire  of  spiritual  life
can be kindled in the human form of life. By careful handling of the smoke in
the  fire,  fire  can  be  made  to  blaze.  Therefore  the  human  form  of  life  is  a
chance for the living entity to escape the entanglement of material existence.
In the human form of life, one can conquer the enemy, lust, by cultivation of
Kåñëa consciousness under able guidance.

TEXT  39

Aav*Ta& jaNaMaeTaeNa jaiNaNaae iNaTYavEir<aa )

k-aMaæPae<a k-aENTaeYa duZPaUre<aaNale/Na c )) 39 ))

ävåtaà jïänam etena
jïänino nitya-vairiëä
käma-rüpeëa kaunteya
duñpüreëänalena ca

SYNONYMS

ävåtam—covered; jïänam—pure consciousness; etena—by this; jïäninaù—of
the knower; nitya-vairiëä—by the eternal enemy; käma-rüpeëa—in the form
of lust; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; duñpüreëa—never to be satisfied;
analena—by the fire; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

Thus the wise living entity’s pure consciousness becomes covered by his
eternal enemy in the form of lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like

fire.

PURPORT

It is said in the Manu-småti that lust cannot be satisfied by any amount of
sense enjoyment, just as fire is never extinguished by a constant supply of fuel.
In the material world, the center of all activities is sex, and thus this material
world  is  called  maithunya-ägära,  or  the  shackles  of  sex  life.  In  the  ordinary
prison  house,  criminals  are  kept  within  bars;  similarly,  the  criminals  who  are
disobedient to the laws of the Lord are shackled by sex life. Advancement of
material  civilization  on  the  basis  of  sense  gratification  means  increasing  the
duration of the material existence of a living entity. Therefore, this lust is the
symbol  of  ignorance  by  which  the  living  entity  is  kept  within  the  material
world.  While  one  enjoys  sense  gratification,  it  may  be  that  there  is  some
feeling  of  happiness,  but  actually  that  so-called  feeling  of  happiness  is  the
ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer.

TEXT  40

wiNd]Yaai<a MaNaae buiÖrSYaaiDaïaNaMauCYaTae )

WTaEivRMaaehYaTYaez jaNaMaav*TYa deihNaMa( )) 40 ))

indriyäëi mano buddhir
asyädhiñöhänam ucyate
etair vimohayaty eña
jïänam ävåtya dehinam

SYNONYMS

indriyäëi—the senses; manaù—the mind; buddhiù—the intelligence; asya—of
this lust; adhiñöhänam—sitting place; ucyate—is called; etaiù—by all these;
vimohayati—bewilders; eñaù—this lust; jïänam—knowledge;
ävåtya—covering; dehinam—of the embodied.

TRANSLATION

The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of this lust.
Through them lust covers the real knowledge of the living entity and bewilders
him.

PURPORT

The  enemy  has  captured  different  strategic  positions  in  the  body  of  the
conditioned soul, and therefore Lord Kåñëa is giving hints of those places, so
that one who wants to conquer the enemy may know where he can be found.
Mind  is  the  center  of  all  the  activities  of  the  senses,  and  thus  when  we  hear
about sense objects the mind generally becomes a reservoir of all ideas of sense
gratification; and, as a result, the mind and the senses become the repositories
of  lust.  Next,  the  intelligence  department  becomes  the  capital  of  such  lustful
propensities.  Intelligence  is  the  immediate  next-door  neighbor  of  the  spirit
soul.  Lusty  intelligence  influences  the  spirit  soul  to  acquire  the  false  ego  and
identify itself with matter, and thus with the mind and senses. The spirit soul
becomes  addicted  to  enjoying  the  material  senses  and  mistakes  this  as  true
happiness. This false identification of the spirit soul is very nicely explained in
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.84.13):

yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke
sva-dhéù kalaträdiñu bhauma ijya-dhéù
yat-tértha-buddhiù salile na karhicij
janeñv abhijïeñu sa eva go-kharaù

“A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his
self,  who  considers  the  by-products  of  the  body  to  be  his  kinsmen,  who
considers  the  land  of  birth  worshipable,  and  who  goes  to  the  place  of
pilgrimage  simply  to  take  a  bath  rather  than  meet  men  of  transcendental
knowledge there, is to be considered like an ass or a cow.

TEXT  41

TaSMaatviMaiNd]Yaa<YaadaE iNaYaMYa >arTazR>a )

PaaPMaaNa& Pa[Jaih ùeNa& jaNaivjaNaNaaXaNaMa( )) 41 ))

tasmät tvam indriyäëy ädau
niyamya bharatarñabha
päpmänaà prajahi hy enaà
jïäna-vijïäna-näçanam

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; tvam—you; indriyäëi—senses; ädau—in the beginning;
niyamya—by regulating; bharata-åñabha—O chief amongst the descendants of
Bharata; päpmänam—the great symbol of sin; prajahi—curb; hi—certainly;
enam—this; jïäna—of knowledge; vijïäna—and scientific knowledge of the
pure soul; näçanam—the destroyer.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bhäratas, in the very beginning curb this

great symbol of sin [lust] by regulating the senses, and slay this destroyer of
knowledge and self-realization.

PURPORT

The Lord advised Arjuna to regulate the senses from the very beginning so
that he could curb the greatest sinful enemy, lust, which destroys the urge for
self-realization and specific knowledge of the self. Jïäna refers to knowledge of
self as distinguished from non-self, or in other words, knowledge that the spirit
soul  is  not  the  body.  Vijïäna  refers  to  specific  knowledge  of  the  spirit  soul’s
constitutional  position  and  his  relationship  to  the  Supreme  Soul.  It  is
explained thus in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.9.31):

jïänaà parama-guhyaà me
yad vijïäna-samanvitam

sa-rahasyaà tad-aìgaà ca
gåhäëa gaditaà mayä

“The  knowledge  of  the  self  and  Supreme  Self  is  very  confidential  and
mysterious,  but  such  knowledge  and  specific  realization  can  be  understood  if
explained with their various aspects by the Lord Himself.” Bhagavad-gétä gives
us that general and specific knowledge of the self. The living entities are parts
and parcels of the Lord, and therefore they are simply meant to serve the Lord.
This consciousness is called Kåñëa consciousness. So, from the very beginning
of life one has to learn this Kåñëa consciousness, and thereby one may become
fully Kåñëa conscious and act accordingly.

Lust is only the perverted reflection of the love of God which is natural for
every living entity. But if one is educated in Kåñëa consciousness from the very
beginning, that natural love of God cannot deteriorate into lust. When love of
God deteriorates into lust, it is very difficult to return to the normal condition.
Nonetheless, Kåñëa consciousness is so powerful that even a late beginner can
become  a  lover  of  God  by  following  the  regulative  principles  of  devotional
service.  So,  from  any  stage  of  life,  or  from  the  time  of  understanding  its
urgency,  one  can  begin  regulating  the  senses  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,
devotional  service  of  the  Lord,  and  turn  the  lust  into  love  of  Godhead—the
highest perfectional stage of human life.

TEXT  42

wiNd]Yaai<a Para<YaahuiriNd]Yae>Ya" Par& MaNa" )

MaNaSaSTau Para buiÖYaaeR buÖe" ParTaSTau Sa" )) 42 ))

indriyäëi paräëy ähur
indriyebhyaù paraà manaù
manasas tu parä buddhir
yo buddheù paratas tu saù

SYNONYMS

indriyäëi—senses; paräëi—superior; ähuù—are said; indriyebhyaù—more than
the senses; param—superior; manaù—the mind; manasaù—more than the
mind; tu—also; parä—superior; buddhiù—intelligence; yaù—who;
buddheù—more than the intelligence; parataù—superior; tu—but; saù—he.

TRANSLATION

The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the

senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul] is even
higher than the intelligence.

PURPORT

The  senses  are  different  outlets  for  the  activities  of  lust.  Lust  is  reserved
within the body, but it is given vent through the senses. Therefore, the senses
are superior to the body as a whole. These outlets are not in use when there is
superior  consciousness,  or  Kåñëa  consciousness.  In  Kåñëa  consciousness  the
soul  makes  direct  connection  with  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead;
therefore the hierarchy of bodily functions, as described here, ultimately ends
in  the  Supreme  Soul.  Bodily  action  means  the  functions  of  the  senses,  and
stopping  the  senses  means  stopping  all  bodily  actions.  But  since  the  mind  is
active,  then  even  though  the  body  may  be  silent  and  at  rest,  the  mind  will
act—as it does during dreaming. But above the mind is the determination of
the intelligence, and above the intelligence is the soul proper. If, therefore, the
soul  is  directly  engaged  with  the  Supreme,  naturally  all  other  subordinates,
namely,  the  intelligence,  mind  and  senses,  will  be  automatically  engaged.  In
the  Kaöha  Upaniñad  there  is  a  similar  passage,  in  which  it  is  said  that  the
objects of sense gratification are superior to the senses, and mind is superior to
the  sense  objects.  If,  therefore,  the  mind is directly engaged in the service of
the  Lord  constantly,  then  there  is  no  chance  that  the  senses  will  become
engaged in other ways. This mental attitude has already been explained. paraà
dåñövä  nivartate.  If  the  mind  is  engaged  in  the  transcendental  service  of  the
Lord, there is no chance of its being engaged in the lower propensities. In the
Kaöha Upaniñad the soul has been described as mahän, the great. Therefore the

soul  is  above  all—namely,  the  sense  objects,  the  senses,  the  mind  and  the
intelligence.  Therefore,  directly  understanding  the  constitutional  position  of
the soul is the solution of the whole problem.

With intelligence one has to seek out the constitutional position of the soul
and  then  engage  the  mind  always  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  That  solves  the
whole problem. A neophyte spiritualist is generally advised to keep aloof from
the objects of the senses. But aside from that, one has to strengthen the mind
by  use  of  intelligence.  If  by  intelligence  one  engages  one’s  mind  in  Kåñëa
consciousness,  by  complete  surrender  unto  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  then,  automatically,  the  mind  becomes  stronger,  and  even  though
the  senses  are  very  strong,  like  serpents,  they  will  be  no  more  effective  than
serpents  with  broken  fangs.  But  even  though  the  soul  is  the  master  of
intelligence  and  mind,  and  the  senses  also,  still,  unless  it  is  strengthened  by
association with Kåñëa in Kåñëa consciousness, there is every chance of falling
down due to the agitated mind.

TEXT  43

Wv& buÖe" Par& bud(ßa Sa&STa>YaaTMaaNaMaaTMaNaa )

Jaih Xa}au& Mahabahae k-aMaæPa& duraSadMa( )) 43 ))

evaà buddheù paraà buddhvä
saàstabhyätmänam ätmanä
jahi çatruà mahä-bäho
käma-rüpaà duräsadam

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; buddheù—to intelligence; param—superior; buddhvä—knowing;
saàstabhya—by steadying; ätmänam—the mind; ätmanä—by deliberate
intelligence; jahi—conquer; çatrum—the enemy; mahä-bäho—O
mighty-armed one; käma-rüpam—in the form of lust; duräsadam—formidable.

TRANSLATION

Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to the material senses, mind and
intelligence, O mighty-armed Arjuna, one should steady the mind by deliberate
spiritual intelligence [Kåñëa consciousness] and thus—by spiritual
strength—conquer this insatiable enemy known as lust.

PURPORT

This Third Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä is conclusively directive to Kåñëa
consciousness  by  knowing  oneself  as  the  eternal  servitor  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, without considering impersonal voidness the ultimate
end.  In  the  material  existence  of  life,  one  is  certainly  influenced  by
propensities  for  lust  and  desire  for  dominating  the  resources  of  material
nature. Desire for overlording and for sense gratification is the greatest enemy
of  the  conditioned  soul;  but  by  the  strength  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  can
control the material senses, the mind and the intelligence. One may not give
up  work  and  prescribed  duties  all  of  a  sudden;  but  by  gradually  developing
Kåñëa consciousness, one can be situated in a transcendental position without
being influenced by the material senses and the mind—by steady intelligence
directed toward one’s pure identity. This is the sum total of this chapter. In the
immature stage of material existence, philosophical speculations and artificial
attempts  to  control  the  senses  by  the  so-called  practice  of  yogic  postures  can
never  help  a  man  toward  spiritual  life.  He  must  be  trained  in  Kåñëa
consciousness by higher intelligence.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Third Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Karma-yoga, or the Discharge of One’s Prescribed
Duty in Kåñëa Consciousness.

- CHAPTER 4 -
Transcendental Knowledge

TEXT  1

é[q>aGavaNauvac

wMa& ivvSvTae YaaeGa& Pa[ae¢-vaNahMaVYaYaMa( )

ivvSvaNMaNave Pa[ah MaNauir+vak-ve_b]vqTa( )) 1 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
imaà vivasvate yogaà
proktavän aham avyayam
vivasvän manave präha
manur ikñväkave ’bravét

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; imam—this;
vivasvate—unto the sun-god; yogam—the science of one’s relationship to the
Supreme; proktavän—instructed; aham—I; avyayam—imperishable;
vivasvän—Vivasvän (the sun-god’s name); manave—unto the father of
mankind (of the name Vaivasvata); präha—told; manuù—the father of
mankind; ikñväkave—unto King Ikñväku; abravét—said.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, said: I instructed this

imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvän, and Vivasvän instructed
it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Ikñväku.

PURPORT

Herein we find the history of the Bhagavad-gétä traced from a remote time
when it was delivered to the royal order of all planets, beginning from the sun
planet. The kings of all planets are especially meant for the protection of the
inhabitants,  and  therefore  the  royal  order  should  understand  the  science  of
Bhagavad-gétä  in  order  to  be  able  to  rule  the  citizens  and  protect  them  from
material  bondage  to  lust.  Human  life  is  meant  for  cultivation  of  spiritual
knowledge, in eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and the executive heads of all states and all planets are obliged to impart this
lesson to the citizens by education, culture and devotion. In other words, the
executive  heads  of  all  states  are  intended  to  spread  the  science  of  Kåñëa
consciousness so that the people may take advantage of this great science and
pursue a successful path, utilizing the opportunity of the human form of life.

In this millennium, the sun-god is known as Vivasvän, the king of the sun,
which  is  the  origin  of  all  planets  within  the  solar  system.  In  the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.52) it is stated:

yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù
yasyäjïayä bhramati sambhåta-käla-cakro
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi

“Let me worship,” Lord Brahmä said, “the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Govinda  [Kåñëa],  who  is  the  original  person  and  under  whose  order  the  sun,
which is the king of all planets, is assuming immense power and heat. The sun
represents  the  eye  of  the  Lord  and  traverses  its  orbit  in  obedience  to  His
order.”

The sun is the king of the planets, and the sun-god (at present of the name
Vivasvän)  rules  the  sun  planet,  which  is  controlling  all  other  planets  by
supplying  heat  and  light.  He  is  rotating  under  the  order  of  Kåñëa,  and  Lord
Kåñëa originally made Vivasvän His first disciple to understand the science of
Bhagavad-gétä.  The  Gétä  is  not,  therefore,  a  speculative  treatise  for  the
insignificant  mundane  scholar  but  is  a  standard  book  of  knowledge  coming

down from time immemorial.

In the Mahäbhärata (Çänti-parva 348.51–52) we can trace out the history of

the Gétä as follows:

tretä-yugädau ca tato
vivasvän manave dadau
manuç ca loka-bhåty-arthaà
sutäyekñväkave dadau

ikñväkuëä ca kathito
vyäpya lokän avasthitaù

“In  the  beginning  of  the  millennium  known  as  Tretä-yuga  this  science  of
the relationship with the Supreme was delivered by Vivasvän to Manu. Manu,
being the father of mankind, gave it to his son Mahäräja Ikñväku, the king of
this  earth  planet  and  forefather  of  the  Raghu  dynasty,  in  which  Lord
Rämacandra  appeared.”  Therefore,  Bhagavad-gétä  existed  in  human  society
from the time of Mahäräja Ikñväku.

At the present moment we have just passed through five thousand years of
the  Kali-yuga,  which  lasts  432,000  years.  Before  this  there  was  Dväpara-yuga
(800,000 years), and before that there was Tretä-yuga (1,200,000 years). Thus,
some 2,005,000 years ago, Manu spoke the Bhagavad-gétä to his disciple and son
Mahäräja Ikñväku, the king of this planet earth. The age of the current Manu
is calculated to last some 305,300,000 years, of which 120,400,000 have passed.
Accepting that before the birth of Manu the Gétä was spoken by the Lord to
His disciple the sun-god Vivasvän, a rough estimate is that the Gétä was spoken
at least 120,400,000 years ago; and in human society it has been extant for two
million years. It was respoken by the Lord again to Arjuna about five thousand
years  ago.  That  is  the  rough  estimate  of  the  history  of  the  Gétä,  according  to
the Gétä itself and according to the version of the speaker, Lord Çré Kåñëa. It
was  spoken  to  the  sun-god  Vivasvän  because  he  is  also  a  kñatriya  and  is  the
father of all kñatriyas who are descendants of the sun-god, or the sürya-vaàça
kñatriyas.  Because  Bhagavad-gétä  is  as  good  as  the  Vedas,  being  spoken  by  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  this  knowledge  is  apauruñeya,  superhuman.
Since  the  Vedic  instructions  are  accepted  as  they  are,  without  human

interpretation,  the  Gétä  must  therefore  be  accepted  without  mundane
interpretation.  The  mundane  wranglers  may  speculate  on  the  Gétä  in  their
own ways, but that is not Bhagavad-gétä as it is. Therefore, Bhagavad-gétä has to
be  accepted  as  it  is,  from  the  disciplic  succession,  and  it  is  described  herein
that  the  Lord  spoke  to  the  sun-god,  the  sun-god  spoke  to  his  son  Manu  and
Manu spoke to his son Ikñväku.

TEXT  2

Wv& ParMParaPa[aáiMaMa& raJazRYaae ivdu" )

Sa k-ale/Naeh MahTaa YaaeGaae Naí" ParNTaPa )) 2 ))

evaà paramparä-präptam
imaà räjarñayo viduù
sa käleneha mahatä
yogo nañöaù parantapa

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; paramparä—by disciplic succession; präptam—received;
imam—this science; räja-åñayaù—the saintly kings; viduù—understood;
saù—that knowledge; kälena—in the course of time; iha—in this world;
mahatä—great; yogaù—the science of one’s relationship with the Supreme;
nañöaù—scattered; parantapa—O Arjuna, subduer of the enemies.

TRANSLATION

This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course of
time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is appears to be
lost.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated that the Gétä was especially meant for the saintly kings
because they were to execute its purpose in ruling over the citizens. Certainly
Bhagavad-gétä was never meant for the demonic persons, who would dissipate
its  value  for  no  one’s  benefit  and  would  devise  all  types  of  interpretations
according to personal whims. As soon as the original purpose was scattered by
the  motives  of  the  unscrupulous  commentators,  there  arose  the  need  to
reestablish the disciplic succession. Five thousand years ago it was detected by
the  Lord  Himself  that  the  disciplic  succession  was  broken,  and  therefore  He
declared that the purpose of the Gétä appeared to be lost. In the same way, at
the present moment also there are so many editions of the Gétä (especially in
English),  but  almost  all  of  them  are  not  according  to  authorized  disciplic
succession.  There  are  innumerable  interpretations  rendered  by  different
mundane  scholars,  but  almost  all  of  them  do  not  accept  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  although  they  make  a  good  business  on  the
words  of  Çré  Kåñëa.  This  spirit  is  demonic,  because  demons  do  not  believe  in
God but simply enjoy the property of the Supreme. Since there is a great need
of  an  edition  of  the  Gétä  in  English,  as  it  is  received  by  the  paramparä
(disciplic succession) system, an attempt is made herewith to fulfill this great
want. Bhagavad-gétä—accepted as it is—is a great boon to humanity; but if it is
accepted as a treatise of philosophical speculations, it is simply a waste of time.

TEXT  3

Sa WvaYa& MaYaa Tae_Û YaaeGa" Pa[ae¢-" PauraTaNa" )

>a¢-ae_iSa Mae Sa%a ceiTa rhSYa& ùeTadutaMaMa( )) 3 ))

sa eväyaà mayä te ’dya
yogaù proktaù purätanaù
bhakto ’si me sakhä ceti
rahasyaà hy etad uttamam

SYNONYMS

saù—the same; eva—certainly; ayam—this; mayä—by Me; te—unto you;
adya—today; yogaù—the science of yoga; proktaù—spoken; purätanaù—very
old; bhaktaù—devotee; asi—you are; me—My; sakhä—friend; ca—also;
iti—therefore; rahasyam—mystery; hi—certainly; etat—this;
uttamam—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today told

by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend and can
therefore understand the transcendental mystery of this science.

PURPORT

There are two classes of men, namely the devotee and the demon. The Lord
selected  Arjuna  as  the  recipient  of  this  great  science  owing  to  his  being  a
devotee  of  the  Lord,  but  for  the  demon  it  is  not  possible  to  understand  this
great mysterious science. There are a number of editions of this great book of
knowledge.  Some  of  them  have  commentaries  by  the  devotees,  and  some  of
them  have  commentaries  by  the  demons.  Commentation  by  the  devotees  is
real,  whereas  that  of  the  demons  is  useless.  Arjuna  accepts  Çré  Kåñëa  as  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and any commentary on the Gétä following
in the footsteps of Arjuna is real devotional service to the cause of this great
science.  The  demonic,  however,  do  not  accept  Lord  Kåñëa  as  He  is.  Instead
they  concoct  something  about  Kåñëa  and  mislead  general  readers  from  the
path  of  Kåñëa’s  instructions.  Here  is  a  warning  about  such  misleading  paths.
One  should  try  to  follow  the  disciplic  succession  from  Arjuna,  and  thus  be
benefitted by this great science of Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä.

TEXT  4

AJauRNa ovac

APar& >avTaae JaNMa Par& JaNMa ivvSvTa" )

k-QaMaeTaiÜJaaNaqYaa& TvMaadaE Pa[ae¢-vaiNaiTa )) 4 ))

arjuna uväca
aparaà bhavato janma
paraà janma vivasvataù
katham etad vijänéyäà
tvam ädau proktavän iti

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; aparam—junior; bhavataù—Your; janma—birth;
param—superior; janma—birth; vivasvataù—of the sun-god; katham—how;
etat—this; vijänéyäm—shall I understand; tvam—You; ädau—in the
beginning; proktavän—instructed; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvän is senior by birth to You. How am I to

understand that in the beginning You instructed this science to him?

PURPORT

Arjuna  is  an  accepted  devotee  of  the  Lord,  so  how  could  he  not  believe
Kåñëa’s  words?  The  fact  is  that  Arjuna  is  not  inquiring  for  himself  but  for
those  who  do  not  believe  in  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  or  for  the
demons who do not like the idea that Kåñëa should be accepted as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; for them only Arjuna inquires on this point, as if he
were himself not aware of the Personality of Godhead, or Kåñëa. As it will be
evident from the Tenth Chapter, Arjuna knew perfectly well that Kåñëa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the fountainhead of everything and the last
word in transcendence. Of course, Kåñëa also appeared as the son of Devaké on
this  earth.  How  Kåñëa  remained  the  same  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,
the eternal original person, is very difficult for an ordinary man to understand.
Therefore, to clarify this point, Arjuna put this question before Kåñëa so that

He Himself could speak authoritatively. That Kåñëa is the supreme authority is
accepted  by  the  whole  world,  not  only  at  present  but  from  time  immemorial,
and  the  demons  alone  reject  Him.  Anyway,  since  Kåñëa  is  the  authority
accepted by all, Arjuna put this question before Him in order that Kåñëa would
describe  Himself  without  being  depicted  by  the  demons,  who  always  try  to
distort  Him  in  a  way  understandable  to  the  demons  and  their  followers.  It  is
necessary  that  everyone,  for  his  own  interest,  know  the  science  of  Kåñëa.
Therefore,  when  Kåñëa  Himself  speaks  about  Himself,  it  is  auspicious  for  all
the worlds. To the demons, such explanations by Kåñëa Himself may appear to
be strange because the demons always study Kåñëa from their own standpoint,
but  those  who  are  devotees  heartily  welcome  the  statements  of  Kåñëa  when
they  are  spoken  by  Kåñëa  Himself.  The  devotees  will  always  worship  such
authoritative statements of Kåñëa because they are always eager to know more
and more about Him. The atheists, who consider Kåñëa an ordinary man, may
in  this  way  come  to  know  that  Kåñëa  is  superhuman,  that  He  is
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha 
and
knowledge—that  He  is  transcendental,  and  that  He  is  above  the  domination
of the modes of material nature and above the influence of time and space. A
devotee of Kåñëa, like Arjuna, is undoubtedly above any misunderstanding of
the transcendental position of Kåñëa. Arjuna’s putting this question before the
Lord  is  simply  an  attempt  by  the  devotee  to  defy  the  atheistic  attitude  of
persons  who  consider  Kåñëa  to  be  an  ordinary  human  being,  subject  to  the
modes of material nature.

5.1]—the 

eternal 

form 

bliss 

[Bs. 

of 

TEXT  5

é[q>aGavaNauvac

bhUiNa Mae VYaTaqTaaiNa JaNMaaiNa Tav caJauRNa )

TaaNYah& ved SavaRi<a Na Tv& veTQa ParNTaPa )) 5 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
bahüni me vyatétäni
janmäni tava cärjuna

täny ahaà veda sarväëi
na tvaà vettha parantapa

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; bahüni—many; me—of
Mine; vyatétäni—have passed; janmäni—births; tava—of yours; ca—and also;
arjuna—O Arjuna; täni—those; aham—I; veda—do know; sarväëi—all;
na—not; tvam—you; vettha—know; parantapa—O subduer of the enemy.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead said: Many, many births both you and I have
passed. I can remember all of them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!

PURPORT

In  the  Brahma-saàhitä  (5.33)  we  have  information  of  many,  many

incarnations of the Lord. It is stated there:

advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi

“I  worship  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Govinda  [Kåñëa],  who  is
infallible,  without  beginning.  Although
the  original  person—absolute, 
expanded into unlimited forms, He is still the same original, the oldest, and the
person  always  appearing  as  a  fresh  youth.  Such  eternal,  blissful,  all-knowing
forms of the Lord are usually understood by the best Vedic scholars, but they
are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees.”
It is also stated in Brahma-saàhitä (5.39):

rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan
nänävatäram akarod bhuvaneñu kintu
kåñëaù svayaà samabhavat paramaù pumän yo

govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi

“I  worship  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Govinda  [Kåñëa],  who  is
always  situated  in  various  incarnations  such  as  Räma,  Nåsiàha  and  many
subincarnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godhead known
as Kåñëa, and who incarnates personally also.”

In  the  Vedas  also  it  is  said  that  the  Lord,  although  one  without  a  second,
manifests Himself in innumerable forms. He is like the vaidurya stone, which
changes color yet still remains one. All those multiforms are understood by the
pure,  unalloyed  devotees,  but  not  by  a  simple  study  of  the  Vedas  (vedeñu
durlabham  adurlabham  ätma-bhaktau).  Devotees  like  Arjuna  are  constant
companions  of  the  Lord,  and  whenever  the  Lord  incarnates,  the  associate
devotees  also  incarnate  in  order  to  serve  the  Lord  in  different  capacities.
Arjuna  is  one  of  these  devotees,  and  in  this  verse  it  is  understood  that  some
millions of years ago when Lord Kåñëa spoke the Bhagavad-gétä to the sun-god
Vivasvän, Arjuna, in a different capacity, was also present. But the difference
between  the  Lord  and  Arjuna  is  that  the  Lord  remembered  the  incident
whereas  Arjuna  could  not  remember.  That  is  the  difference  between  the
part-and-parcel  living  entity  and  the  Supreme  Lord.  Although  Arjuna  is
addressed  herein  as  the  mighty  hero  who  could  subdue  the  enemies,  he  is
unable  to  recall  what  had  happened  in  his  various  past  births.  Therefore,  a
living  entity,  however  great  he  may  be  in  the  material  estimation,  can  never
equal the Supreme Lord. Anyone who is a constant companion of the Lord is
certainly a liberated person, but he cannot be equal to the Lord. The Lord is
described  in  the  Brahma-saàhitä  as  infallible  (acyuta),  which  means  that  He
never  forgets  Himself,  even  though  He  is  in  material  contact.  Therefore,  the
Lord and the living entity can never be equal in all respects, even if the living
entity is as liberated as Arjuna. Although Arjuna is a devotee of the Lord, he
sometimes forgets the nature of the Lord, but by the divine grace a devotee can
at once understand the infallible condition of the Lord, whereas a nondevotee
or a demon cannot understand this transcendental nature. Consequently these
descriptions  in  the  Gétä  cannot  be  understood  by  demonic  brains.  Kåñëa
remembered  acts  which  were  performed  by  Him  millions  of  years  before,  but
Arjuna could not, despite the fact that both Kåñëa and Arjuna are eternal in

nature. We may also note herein that a living entity forgets everything due to
his change of body, but the Lord remembers because He does not change His
sac-cid-änanda  body.  He  is  advaita,  which  means  there  is  no  distinction
between  His  body  and  Himself.  Everything 
is
spirit—whereas the conditioned soul is different from his material body. And
because the Lord’s body and self are identical, His position is always different
from that of the ordinary living entity, even when He descends to the material
platform. The demons cannot adjust themselves to this transcendental nature
of the Lord, which the Lord Himself explains in the following verse.

in  relation  to  Him 

TEXT  6

AJaae_iPa SaàVYaYaaTMaa >aUTaaNaaMaqìrae_iPa SaNa( )

Pa[k*-iTa& SvaMaiDaïaYa SaM>avaMYaaTMaMaaYaYaa )) 6 ))

ajo ’pi sann avyayätmä
bhütänäm éçvaro ’pi san
prakåtià sväm adhiñöhäya
sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä

SYNONYMS

ajaù—unborn; api—although; san—being so; avyaya—without deterioration;
ätmä—body; bhütänäm—of all those who are born; éçvaraù—the Supreme
Lord; api—although; san—being so; prakåtim—in the transcendental form;
sväm—of Myself; adhiñöhäya—being so situated; sambhavämi—I do incarnate;
ätma-mäyayä—by My internal energy.

TRANSLATION

Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all living entities, I still appear in every millennium
in My original transcendental form.

PURPORT

The  Lord  has  spoken  about  the  peculiarity  of  His  birth:  although  He  may
appear like an ordinary person, He remembers everything of His many, many
past  “births,”  whereas  a  common  man  cannot  remember  what  he  has  done
even a few hours before. If someone is asked what he did exactly at the same
time  one  day  earlier,  it  would  be  very  difficult  for  a  common  man  to  answer
immediately. He would surely have to dredge his memory to recall what he was
doing exactly at the same time one day before. And yet, men often dare claim
to  be  God,  or  Kåñëa.  One  should  not  be  misled  by  such  meaningless  claims.
Then again, the Lord explains His prakåti, or His form. Prakåti means “nature,”
as well as svarüpa, or “one’s own form.” The Lord says that He appears in His
own body. He does not change His body, as the common living entity changes
from one body to another. The conditioned soul may have one kind of body in
the present birth, but he has a different body in the next birth. In the material
world, the living entity has no fixed body but transmigrates from one body to
another. The Lord, however, does not do so. Whenever He appears, He does so
in  the  same  original  body,  by  His  internal  potency.  In  other  words,  Kåñëa
appears  in  this  material  world  in  His  original  eternal  form,  with  two  hands,
holding  a  flute.  He  appears  exactly  in  His  eternal  body,  uncontaminated  by
this material world. Although He appears in the same transcendental body and
is Lord of the universe, it still appears that He takes His birth like an ordinary
living entity. And although His body does not deteriorate like a material body,
it  still  appears  that  Lord  Kåñëa  grows  from  childhood  to  boyhood  and  from
boyhood to youth. But astonishingly enough He never ages beyond youth. At
the time of the Battle of Kurukñetra, He had many grandchildren at home; or,
in  other  words,  He  had  sufficiently  aged  by  material  calculations.  Still  He
looked just like a young man twenty or twenty-five years old. We never see a
picture of Kåñëa in old age because He never grows old like us, although He is
the oldest person in the whole creation—past, present, and future. Neither His
body  nor  His  intelligence  ever  deteriorates  or  changes.  Therefore,  it  is  clear
that in spite of His being in the material world, He is the same unborn, eternal
form  of  bliss  and  knowledge,  changeless  in  His  transcendental  body  and

to 

still  appears 

take  His  birth 

is  unborn  yet  He 

intelligence.  Factually,  His  appearance  and  disappearance  is  like  the  sun’s
rising, moving before us, and then disappearing from our eyesight. When the
sun is out of sight, we think that the sun is set, and when the sun is before our
eyes, we think that the sun is on the horizon. Actually, the sun is always in its
fixed position, but owing to our defective, insufficient senses, we calculate the
appearance and disappearance of the sun in the sky. And because Lord Kåñëa’s
appearance  and  disappearance  are  completely  different  from  that  of  any
ordinary,  common  living  entity,  it  is  evident  that  He  is  eternal,  blissful
knowledge  by  His  internal  potency—and  He  is  never  contaminated  by
material  nature.  The  Vedas  also  confirm  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of
in
Godhead 
multimanifestations.  The  Vedic  supplementary  literatures  also  confirm  that
even though the Lord appears to be taking His birth, He is still without change
of body. In the Bhägavatam, He appears before His mother as Näräyaëa, with
four  hands  and  the  decorations  of  the  six  kinds  of  full  opulences.  His
appearance in His original eternal form is His causeless mercy, bestowed upon
the living entities so that they can concentrate on the Supreme Lord as He is,
and  not  on  mental  concoctions  or  imaginations,  which  the  impersonalist
wrongly thinks the Lord’s forms to be. The word mäyä, or ätma-mäyä, refers to
the Lord’s causeless mercy, according to the Viçva-koça dictionary. The Lord is
conscious of all of His previous appearances and disappearances, but a common
living entity forgets everything about his past body as soon as he gets another
body. He is the Lord of all living entities because He performs wonderful and
superhuman activities while He is on this earth. Therefore, the Lord is always
the same Absolute Truth and is without differentiation between His form and
self, or between His quality and body. A question may now be raised as to why
the  Lord  appears  and  disappears  in  this  world.  This  is  explained  in  the  next
verse.

TEXT  7

Yada Yada ih DaMaRSYa Gl/aiNa>aRviTa >aarTa )

A>YauTQaaNaMaDaMaRSYa TadaTMaaNa& Sa*JaaMYahMa( )) 7 ))

yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham

SYNONYMS

yadä yadä—whenever and wherever; hi—certainly; dharmasya—of religion;
gläniù—discrepancies; bhavati—become manifested; bhärata—O descendant
of Bharata; abhyutthänam—predominance; adharmasya—of irreligion;
tadä—at that time; ätmänam—self; såjämi—manifest; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O

descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself.

PURPORT

The word såjämi is significant herein. Såjämi cannot be used in the sense of
creation, because, according to the previous verse, there is no creation of the
Lord’s  form  or  body,  since  all  of  the  forms  are  eternally  existent.  Therefore,
såjämi  means  that  the  Lord  manifests  Himself  as  He  is.  Although  the  Lord
appears  on  schedule,  namely  at  the  end  of  the  Dväpara-yuga  of  the
twenty-eighth millennium of the seventh Manu in one day of Brahmä, He has
no obligation to adhere to such rules and regulations, because He is completely
free  to  act  in  many  ways  at  His  will.  He  therefore  appears  by  His  own  will
whenever there is a predominance of irreligiosity and a disappearance of true
religion. Principles of religion are laid down in the Vedas, and any discrepancy
in  the  matter  of  properly  executing  the  rules  of  the  Vedas  makes  one
irreligious. In the Bhägavatam it is stated that such principles are the laws of

the Lord. Only the Lord can manufacture a system of religion. The Vedas are
also accepted as originally spoken by the Lord Himself to Brahmä, from within
his heart. Therefore, the principles of dharma, or religion, are the direct orders
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (dharmaà tu säkñäd bhagavat-praëétam
[SB  6.3.19]).  These  principles  are  clearly 
indicated  throughout  the
Bhagavad-gétä.  The  purpose  of  the  Vedas  is  to  establish  such  principles  under
the order of the Supreme Lord, and the Lord directly orders, at the end of the
Gétä, that the highest principle of religion is to surrender unto Him only, and
nothing more. The Vedic principles push one towards complete surrender unto
Him;  and  whenever  such  principles  are  disturbed  by  the  demoniac,  the  Lord
appears.  From  the  Bhägavatam  we  understand  that  Lord  Buddha  is  the
incarnation  of  Kåñëa  who  appeared  when  materialism  was  rampant  and
materialists  were  using  the  pretext  of  the  authority  of  the  Vedas.  Although
there are certain restrictive rules and regulations regarding animal sacrifice for
particular  purposes  in  the  Vedas,  people  of  demonic  tendency  still  took  to
animal  sacrifice  without  reference  to  the  Vedic  principles.  Lord  Buddha
appeared  to  stop  this  nonsense  and  to  establish  the  Vedic  principles  of
nonviolence.  Therefore  each  and  every  avatära,  or  incarnation  of  the  Lord,
has a particular mission, and they are all described in the revealed scriptures.
No one should be accepted as an avatära unless he is referred to by scriptures.
It  is  not  a  fact  that  the  Lord  appears  only  on  Indian  soil.  He  can  manifest
Himself  anywhere  and  everywhere,  and  whenever  He  desires  to  appear.  In
each  and  every  incarnation,  He  speaks  as  much  about  religion  as  can  be
understood by the particular people under their particular circumstances. But
the mission is the same—to lead people to God consciousness and obedience to
the  principles  of  religion.  Sometimes  He  descends  personally,  and  sometimes
He  sends  His  bona  fide  representative  in  the  form  of  His  son,  or  servant,  or
Himself in some disguised form.

The  principles  of  the  Bhagavad-gétä  were  spoken  to  Arjuna,  and,  for  that
matter,  to  other  highly  elevated  persons,  because  he  was  highly  advanced
compared to ordinary persons in other parts of the world. Two plus two equals
four is a mathematical principle that is true in the beginner’s arithmetic class
and  in  the  advanced  class  as  well.  Still,  there  are  higher  and  lower

mathematics. In all incarnations of the Lord, therefore, the same principles are
taught,  but  they  appear  to  be  higher  and  lower  in  varied  circumstances.  The
higher principles of religion begin with the acceptance of the four orders and
the four statuses of social life, as will be explained later. The whole purpose of
the mission of incarnations is to arouse Kåñëa consciousness everywhere. Such
consciousness is manifest and nonmanifest only under different circumstances.

TEXT  8

Pair}aa<aaYa SaaDaUNaa& ivNaaXaaYa c duZk*-TaaMa( )

DaMaRSa&SQaaPaNaaQaaRYa SaM>avaiMa YauGae YauGae )) 8 ))

pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge

SYNONYMS

pariträëäya—for the deliverance; sädhünäm—of the devotees; vinäçäya—for
the annihilation; ca—and; duñkåtäm—of the miscreants; dharma—principles
of religion; saàsthäpana-arthäya—to reestablish; sambhavämi—I do appear;
yuge—millennium; yuge—after millennium.

TRANSLATION

To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to
reestablish the principles of religion, I Myself appear, millennium after
millennium.

PURPORT

According  to  Bhagavad-gétä,  a  sädhu  (holy  man)  is  a  man  in  Kåñëa
consciousness.  A  person  may  appear  to  be  irreligious,  but  if  he  has  the

qualifications of Kåñëa consciousness wholly and fully, he is to be understood
to  be  a  sädhu.  And  duñkåtäm  applies  to  those  who  do  not  care  for  Kåñëa
consciousness.  Such  miscreants,  or  duñkåtäm,  are  described  as  foolish  and  the
lowest  of  mankind,  even  though  they  may  be  decorated  with  mundane
education,  whereas  a  person  who  is  one  hundred  percent  engaged  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  accepted  as  a  sädhu,  even  though  such  a  person  may  be
neither  learned  nor  well  cultured.  As  far  as  the  atheistic  are  concerned,  it  is
not necessary for the Supreme Lord to appear as He is to destroy them, as He
did with the demons Rävaëa and Kaàsa. The Lord has many agents who are
quite  competent  to  vanquish  demons.  But  the  Lord  especially  descends  to
appease His unalloyed devotees, who are always harassed by the demoniac. The
demon harasses the devotee, even though the latter may happen to be his kin.
Although  Prahläda  Mahäräja  was  the  son  of  Hiraëyakaçipu,  he  was
nonetheless  persecuted  by  his  father;  although  Devaké,  the  mother  of  Kåñëa,
was the sister of Kaàsa, she and her husband Vasudeva were persecuted only
because  Kåñëa  was  to  be  born  of  them.  So  Lord  Kåñëa  appeared  primarily  to
deliver  Devaké,  rather  than  kill  Kaàsa,  but  both  were  performed
simultaneously.  Therefore  it  is  said  here  that  to  deliver  the  devotee  and
vanquish the demon miscreants, the Lord appears in different incarnations.

In  the  Caitanya-caritämåta  of  Kåñëadäsa  Kaviräja,  the  following  verses

(Madhya 20.263–264) summarize these principles of incarnation:

såñöi-hetu yei mürti prapaïce avatare
sei éçvara-mürti ‘avatära’ näma dhare

mäyätéta paravyome sabära avasthäna
viçve avatari’ dhare ‘avatära’ näma

“The  avatära,  or  incarnation  of  Godhead,  descends  from  the  kingdom  of
God for material manifestation. And the particular form of the Personality of
Godhead  who  so  descends  is  called  an  incarnation,  or  avatära.  Such
incarnations  are  situated  in  the  spiritual  world,  the  kingdom  of  God.  When
they descend to the material creation, they assume the name avatära.”

There  are  various  kinds  of  avatäras,  such  as  puruñävatäras,  guëävatäras,
lélävatäras,  çakty-äveça  avatäras,  manvantara-avatäras  and  yugävatäras—all

appearing  on  schedule  all  over  the  universe.  But  Lord  Kåñëa  is  the  primeval
Lord, the fountainhead of all avatäras. Lord Çré Kåñëa descends for the specific
purpose of mitigating the anxieties of the pure devotees, who are very anxious
to see Him in His original Våndävana pastimes. Therefore, the prime purpose
of the Kåñëa avatära is to satisfy His unalloyed devotees.

The  Lord  says  that  He  incarnates  Himself  in  every  millennium.  This
indicates  that  He  incarnates  also  in  the  Age  of  Kali.  As  stated  in  the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  the  incarnation  in  the  Age  of  Kali  is  Lord  Caitanya
Mahäprabhu,  who  spread  the  worship  of  Kåñëa  by  the  saìkértana  movement
(congregational  chanting  of  the  holy names) and spread Kåñëa consciousness
throughout  India.  He  predicted  that  this  culture  of  saìkértana  would  be
broadcast  all  over  the  world,  from  town  to  town  and  village  to  village.  Lord
Caitanya as the incarnation of Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, is described
secretly  but  not  directly  in  the  confidential  parts  of  the  revealed  scriptures,
such  as  the  Upaniñads,  Mahäbhärata  and  Bhägavatam.  The  devotees  of  Lord
Kåñëa are very much attracted by the saìkértana movement of Lord Caitanya.
This avatära of the Lord does not kill the miscreants, but delivers them by His
causeless mercy.

TEXT  9

JaNMa k-MaR c Mae idVYaMaev& Yaae veita TatvTa" )

TYa¤-a deh& PauNaJaRNMa NaEiTa MaaMaeiTa Saae_JauRNa )) 9 ))

janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so ’rjuna

SYNONYMS

janma—birth; karma—work; ca—also; me—of Mine; divyam—transcendental;
evam—like this; yaù—anyone who; vetti—knows; tattvataù—in reality;

tyaktvä—leaving aside; deham—this body; punaù—again; janma—birth;
na—never; eti—does attain; mäm—unto Me; eti—does attain; saù—he;
arjuna—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.

PURPORT

The  Lord’s  descent  from  His  transcendental  abode  is  already  explained  in
the  6th  verse.  One  who  can  understand  the  truth  of  the  appearance  of  the
Personality  of  Godhead  is  already  liberated  from  material  bondage,  and
therefore  he  returns  to  the  kingdom  of  God  immediately  after  quitting  this
present  material  body.  Such  liberation  of  the  living  entity  from  material
bondage  is  not  at  all  easy.  The  impersonalists  and  the  yogés  attain  liberation
only after much trouble and many, many births. Even then, the liberation they
achieve—merging  into  the  impersonal  brahmajyoti  of  the  Lord—is  only
partial,  and  there  is  the  risk  of  returning  to  this  material  world.  But  the
devotee,  simply  by  understanding  the  transcendental  nature  of  the  body  and
activities of the Lord, attains the abode of the Lord after ending this body and
does  not  run  the  risk  of  returning  to  this  material  world.  In  the
Brahma-saàhitä  (5.33)  it  is  stated  that  the  Lord  has  many,  many  forms  and
incarnations:  advaitam  acyutam  anädim  ananta-rüpam.  Although  there  are
many  transcendental  forms  of  the  Lord,  they  are  still  one  and  the  same
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  One  has  to  understand  this  fact  with
conviction, although it is incomprehensible to mundane scholars and empiric
philosophers. As stated in the Vedas (Puruña-bodhiné Upaniñad):

eko devo nitya-lélänurakto
bhakta-vyäpé hådy antar-ätmä

“The  one  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  eternally  engaged  in  many,

many transcendental forms in relationships with His unalloyed devotees.” This
Vedic version is confirmed in this verse of the Gétä personally by the Lord. He
who accepts this truth on the strength of the authority of the Vedas and of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and who does not waste time in philosophical
speculations  attains  the  highest  perfectional  stage  of  liberation.  Simply  by
accepting this truth on faith, one can, without a doubt, attain liberation. The
Vedic  version  tat  tvam  asi  is  actually  applied  in  this  case.  Anyone  who
understands  Lord  Kåñëa  to  be  the  Supreme,  or  who  says  unto  the  Lord  “You
are  the  same  Supreme  Brahman,  the  Personality  of  Godhead,”  is  certainly
liberated  instantly,  and  consequently  his  entrance  into  the  transcendental
association of the Lord is guaranteed. In other words, such a faithful devotee of
the  Lord  attains  perfection,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  following  Vedic
assertion:

tam eva viditväti måtyum eti
nänyaù panthä vidyate ’yanäya

“One can attain the perfect stage of liberation from birth and death simply
by  knowing  the  Lord,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  there  is  no
other way to achieve this perfection.” (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 3.8) That there
is  no  alternative  means  that  anyone  who  does  not  understand  Lord  Kåñëa  as
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  surely  in  the  mode  of  ignorance  and
consequently  he  will  not  attain  salvation  simply,  so  to  speak,  by  licking  the
outer  surface  of  the  bottle  of  honey,  or  by  interpreting  the  Bhagavad-gétä
according  to  mundane  scholarship.  Such  empiric  philosophers  may  assume
very important roles in the material world, but they are not necessarily eligible
for liberation. Such puffed-up mundane scholars have to wait for the causeless
mercy  of  the  devotee  of  the  Lord.  One  should  therefore  cultivate  Kåñëa
consciousness with faith and knowledge, and in this way attain perfection.

TEXT  10

vqTaraGa>aYa§-aeDaa MaNMaYaa MaaMauPaaié[Taa" )

bhvae jaNaTaPaSaa PaUTaa MaÙavMaaGaTaa" )) 10 ))

véta-räga-bhaya-krodhä
man-mayä mäm upäçritäù
bahavo jïäna-tapasä
pütä mad-bhävam ägatäù

SYNONYMS

véta—freed from; räga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhäù—and anger;
mat-mayä—fully in Me; mäm—in Me; upäçritäù—being fully situated;
bahavaù—many; jïäna—of knowledge; tapasä—by the penance; pütäù—being
purified; mat-bhävam—transcendental love for Me; ägatäù—attained.

TRANSLATION

Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me and

taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past became purified by
knowledge of Me—and thus they all attained transcendental love for Me.

PURPORT

As  described  above,  it  is  very  difficult  for  a  person  who  is  too  materially
affected  to  understand  the  personal  nature  of  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth.
Generally,  people  who  are  attached  to  the  bodily  conception  of  life  are  so
absorbed  in  materialism  that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  them  to  understand
how the Supreme can be a person. Such materialists cannot even imagine that
there  is  a  transcendental  body  which  is  imperishable,  full  of  knowledge  and
eternally  blissful.  In  the  materialistic  concept,  the  body  is  perishable,  full  of
ignorance  and  completely  miserable.  Therefore,  people  in  general  keep  this
same bodily idea in mind when they are informed of the personal form of the
Lord.  For  such  materialistic  men,  the  form  of  the  gigantic  material
manifestation  is  supreme.  Consequently  they  consider  the  Supreme  to  be
impersonal.  And  because  they  are  too  materially  absorbed,  the  conception  of

retaining  the  personality  after  liberation  from  matter  frightens  them.  When
they  are  informed  that  spiritual  life  is  also  individual  and  personal,  they
become afraid of becoming persons again, and so they naturally prefer a kind
of  merging  into  the  impersonal  void.  Generally,  they  compare  the  living
entities to the bubbles of the ocean, which merge into the ocean. That is the
highest  perfection  of  spiritual  existence  attainable  without  individual
personality. This is a kind of fearful stage of life, devoid of perfect knowledge
of  spiritual  existence.  Furthermore  there  are  many  persons  who  cannot
understand  spiritual  existence  at  all.  Being  embarrassed  by  so  many  theories
and  by  contradictions  of  various  types  of  philosophical  speculation,  they
become  disgusted  or  angry  and  foolishly  conclude  that  there  is  no  supreme
cause  and  that  everything  is  ultimately  void.  Such  people  are  in  a  diseased
condition of life. Some people are too materially attached and therefore do not
give attention to spiritual life, some of them want to merge into the supreme
spiritual  cause,  and  some  of  them  disbelieve  in  everything,  being  angry  at  all
sorts of spiritual speculation out of hopelessness. This last class of men take to
the shelter of some kind of intoxication, and their affective hallucinations are
sometimes accepted as spiritual vision. One has to get rid of all three stages of
attachment to the material world: negligence of spiritual life, fear of a spiritual
personal  identity,  and  the  conception  of  void  that  arises  from  frustration  in
life. To get free from these three stages of the material concept of life, one has
to take complete shelter of the Lord, guided by the bona fide spiritual master,
and follow the disciplines and regulative principles of devotional life. The last
stage of the devotional life is called bhäva, or transcendental love of Godhead.
According to Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.4.15–16), the science of devotional

service:

ädau çraddhä tataù sädhu-
saìgo ’tha bhajana-kriyä
tato ’nartha-nivåttiù syät
tato niñöhä rucis tataù

athäsaktis tato bhävas
tataù premäbhyudaïcati

sädhakänäm ayaà premëaù
prädurbhäve bhavet kramaù

“In  the  beginning  one  must  have  a  preliminary  desire  for  self-realization.
This  will  bring  one  to  the  stage  of  trying  to  associate  with  persons  who  are
spiritually  elevated.  In  the  next  stage  one  becomes  initiated  by  an  elevated
spiritual  master,  and  under  his  instruction  the  neophyte  devotee  begins  the
process  of  devotional  service.  By  execution  of  devotional  service  under  the
guidance  of  the  spiritual  master,  one  becomes  free  from  all  material
attachment,  attains  steadiness  in  self-realization,  and  acquires  a  taste  for
hearing about the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. This taste leads
one further forward to attachment for Kåñëa consciousness, which is matured
in bhäva, or the preliminary stage of transcendental love of God. Real love for
God is called prema, the highest perfectional stage of life.” In the prema stage
there is constant engagement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
So, by the slow process of devotional service, under the guidance of the bona
fide  spiritual  master,  one  can  attain  the  highest  stage,  being  freed  from  all
material  attachment,  from  the  fearfulness  of  one’s  individual  spiritual
personality, and from the frustrations that result in void philosophy. Then one
can ultimately attain to the abode of the Supreme Lord.

TEXT  11

Yae YaQaa Maa& Pa[PaÛNTae Taa&STaQaEv >aJaaMYahMa( )

MaMa vTMaaRNauvTaRNTae MaNauZYaa" PaaQaR SavRXa" )) 11 ))

ye yathä mäà prapadyante
täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham
mama vartmänuvartante
manuñyäù pärtha sarvaçaù

SYNONYMS

ye—all who; yathä—as; mäm—unto Me; prapadyante—surrender; tän—them;

tathä—so; eva—certainly; bhajämi—reward; aham—I; mama—My;
vartma—path; anuvartante—follow; manuñyäù—all men; pärtha—O son of
Påthä; sarvaçaù—in all respects.

TRANSLATION

As all surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone follows My

path in all respects, O son of Påthä.

PURPORT

Everyone 

is  searching  for  Kåñëa 

in  the  different  aspects  of  His
manifestations.  Kåñëa,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  is  partially
realized  in  His  impersonal  brahmajyoti  effulgence  and  as  the  all-pervading
Supersoul  dwelling  within  everything,  including  the  particles  of  atoms.  But
Kåñëa  is  fully  realized  only  by  His  pure  devotees.  Consequently,  Kåñëa  is  the
object  of  everyone’s  realization,  and  thus  anyone  and  everyone  is  satisfied
according to one’s desire to have Him. In the transcendental world also, Kåñëa
reciprocates with His pure devotees in the transcendental attitude, just as the
devotee wants Him. One devotee may want Kåñëa as supreme master, another
as his personal friend, another as his son, and still another as his lover. Kåñëa
rewards all the devotees equally, according to their different intensities of love
for  Him.  In  the  material  world,  the  same reciprocations of feelings are there,
and  they  are  equally  exchanged  by  the  Lord  with  the  different  types  of
worshipers.  The  pure  devotees  both  here  and  in  the  transcendental  abode
associate  with  Him  in  person  and  are  able  to  render  personal  service  to  the
Lord  and  thus  derive  transcendental  bliss  in  His  loving  service.  As  for  those
who  are  impersonalists  and  who  want  to  commit  spiritual  suicide  by
annihilating the individual existence of the living entity, Kåñëa helps also by
absorbing them into His effulgence. Such impersonalists do not agree to accept
the  eternal,  blissful  Personality  of  Godhead;  consequently  they  cannot  relish
the  bliss  of  transcendental  personal  service  to  the  Lord,  having  extinguished
their  individuality.  Some  of  them,  who  are  not  firmly  situated  even  in  the
impersonal  existence,  return  to  this  material  field  to  exhibit  their  dormant

desires for activities. They are not admitted into the spiritual planets, but they
are  again  given  a  chance  to  act  on  the  material  planets.  For  those  who  are
fruitive workers, the Lord awards the desired results of their prescribed duties,
as the yajïeçvara; and those who are yogés seeking mystic powers are awarded
such powers. In other words, everyone is dependent for success upon His mercy
alone, and all kinds of spiritual processes are but different degrees of success on
the same path. Unless, therefore, one comes to the highest perfection of Kåñëa
consciousness,  all  attempts  remain 
the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.3.10):

imperfect,  as 

stated 

in 

is 

akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param

“Whether  one  is  without  desire  [the  condition  of  the  devotees],  or  is
desirous of all fruitive results, or is after liberation, one should with all efforts
try  to  worship  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  for  complete  perfection,
culminating in Kåñëa consciousness.”

TEXT  12

k-a¿NTa" k-MaR<aa& iSaiÖ& YaJaNTa wh devTaa" )

i+aPa[& ih MaaNauze l/aeke- iSaiÖ>aRviTa k-MaRJaa )) 12 ))

käìkñantaù karmaëäà siddhià
yajanta iha devatäù
kñipraà hi mänuñe loke
siddhir bhavati karma-jä

SYNONYMS

käìkñantaù—desiring; karmaëäm—of fruitive activities; siddhim—perfection;
yajante—they worship by sacrifices; iha—in the material world; devatäù—the
demigods; kñipram—very quickly; hi—certainly; mänuñe—in human society;

loke—within this world; siddhiù—success; bhavati—comes; karma-jä—from
fruitive work.

TRANSLATION

Men in this world desire success in fruitive activities, and therefore they
worship the demigods. Quickly, of course, men get results from fruitive work in
this world.

PURPORT

There is a great misconception about the gods or demigods of this material
world,  and  men  of  less  intelligence,  although  passing  as  great  scholars,  take
these  demigods  to  be  various  forms  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Actually,  the
demigods are not different forms of God, but they are God’s different parts and
parcels. God is one, and the parts and parcels are many. The Vedas say, nityo
nityänäm:  God  is  one.  Éçvaraù  paramaù  kåñëaù.  The  Supreme  God  is
one—Kåñëa—and  the  demigods  are  delegated  with  powers  to  manage  this
material world. These demigods are all living entities (nityänäm) with different
grades  of  material  power.  They  cannot  be  equal  to  the  Supreme
God—Näräyaëa,  Viñëu,  or  Kåñëa.  Anyone  who  thinks  that  God  and  the
demigods are on the same level is called an atheist, or päñaëòé. Even the great
demigods like Brahmä and Çiva cannot be compared to the Supreme Lord. In
fact,  the  Lord  is  worshiped  by  demigods  such  as  Brahmä  and  Çiva
(çiva-viriïci-nutam). Yet curiously enough there are many human leaders who
are  worshiped  by 
the  misunderstanding  of
anthropomorphism  or  zoomorphism.  Iha  devatäù  denotes  a  powerful  man  or
demigod  of  this  material  world.  But  Näräyaëa,  Viñëu,  or  Kåñëa,  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  does  not  belong  to  this  world.  He  is  above,  or
transcendental to, material creation. Even Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya, the leader of
the impersonalists, maintains that Näräyaëa, or Kåñëa, is beyond this material
creation.  However,  foolish  people  (håta-jïäna)  worship  the  demigods  because
they want immediate results. They get the results, but do not know that results
so  obtained  are  temporary  and  are  meant  for  less  intelligent  persons.  The

foolish  men  under 

intelligent person is in Kåñëa consciousness, and he has no need to worship the
paltry demigods for some immediate, temporary benefit. The demigods of this
material world, as well as their worshipers, will vanish with the annihilation of
this  material  world.  The  boons  of  the  demigods  are  material  and  temporary.
Both  the  material  worlds  and  their  inhabitants,  including  the  demigods  and
their  worshipers,  are  bubbles  in  the  cosmic  ocean.  In  this  world,  however,
human society is mad after temporary things such as the material opulence of
possessing  land,  family  and  enjoyable  paraphernalia.  To  achieve  such
temporary  things,  people  worship  the  demigods  or  powerful  men  in  human
society.  If  a  man  gets  some  ministership  in  the  government  by  worshiping  a
political leader, he considers that he has achieved a great boon. All of them are
therefore kowtowing to the so-called leaders or “big guns” in order to achieve
temporary boons, and they indeed achieve such things. Such foolish men are
not  interested  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  for  the  permanent  solution  to  the
hardships of material existence. They are all after sense enjoyment, and to get
a  little  facility  for  sense  enjoyment  they  are  attracted  to  worship  empowered
living entities known as demigods. This verse indicates that people are rarely
interested  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  They  are  mostly  interested  in  material
enjoyment, and therefore they worship some powerful living entity.

TEXT  13

caTauvR<Ya| MaYaa Sa*í& Gau<ak-MaRiv>aaGaXa" )

TaSYa k-TaaRrMaiPa Maa& ivÖyk-TaaRrMaVYaYaMa( )) 13 ))

cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà
guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù
tasya kartäram api mäà
viddhy akartäram avyayam

SYNONYMS

cätuù-varëyam—the four divisions of human society; mayä—by Me;

såñöam—created; guëa—of quality; karma—and work; vibhägaçaù—in terms of
division; tasya—of that; kartäram—the father; api—although; mäm—Me;
viddhi—you may know; akartäram—as the nondoer; avyayam—unchangeable.

TRANSLATION

According to the three modes of material nature and the work associated

with them, the four divisions of human society are created by Me. And
although I am the creator of this system, you should know that I am yet the
nondoer, being unchangeable.

PURPORT

The  Lord  is  the  creator  of  everything.  Everything  is  born  of  Him,
everything  is  sustained  by  Him,  and  everything,  after  annihilation,  rests  in
Him.  He  is  therefore  the  creator  of  the  four  divisions  of  the  social  order,
beginning with the intelligent class of men, technically called brähmaëas due
to  their  being  situated  in  the  mode  of  goodness.  Next  is  the  administrative
class, technically called the kñatriyas due to their being situated in the mode of
passion.  The  mercantile  men,  called  the  vaiçyas,  are  situated  in  the  mixed
modes of passion and ignorance, and the çüdras, or laborer class, are situated in
the  ignorant  mode  of  material  nature.  In  spite  of  His  creating  the  four
divisions  of  human  society,  Lord  Kåñëa  does  not  belong  to  any  of  these
divisions,  because  He  is  not  one  of  the  conditioned  souls,  a  section  of  whom
form human society. Human society is similar to any other animal society, but
to  elevate  men  from  the  animal  status,  the  above-mentioned  divisions  are
created  by  the  Lord  for  the  systematic  development  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.
The tendency of a particular man toward work is determined by the modes of
material nature which he has acquired. Such symptoms of life, according to the
different modes of material nature, are described in the Eighteenth Chapter of
this  book.  A  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  however,  is  above  even  the
brähmaëas.  Although  brähmaëas  by  quality  are  supposed  to  know  about
Brahman,  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth,  most  of  them  approach  only  the
impersonal Brahman manifestation of Lord Kåñëa. But a man who transcends

the  limited  knowledge  of  a  brähmaëa  and  reaches  the  knowledge  of  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, becomes a person in Kåñëa
consciousness—or,  in  other  words,  a  Vaiñëava.  Kåñëa  consciousness  includes
knowledge  of  all  different  plenary  expansions  of  Kåñëa,  namely  Räma,
Nåsiàha,  Varäha,  etc.  And  as  Kåñëa  is  transcendental  to  this  system  of  the
four  divisions  of  human  society,  a  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  also
transcendental  to  all  divisions  of  human  society,  whether  we  consider  the
divisions of community, nation or species.

TEXT  14

Na Maa& k-MaaRi<a il/MPaiNTa Na Mae k-MaRf-le/ SPa*ha )

wiTa Maa& Yaae_i>aJaaNaaiTa k-MaRi>aNaR Sa bDYaTae )) 14 ))

na mäà karmäëi limpanti
na me karma-phale spåhä
iti mäà yo ’bhijänäti
karmabhir na sa badhyate

SYNONYMS

na—never; mäm—Me; karmäëi—all kinds of work; limpanti—do affect;
na—nor; me—My; karma-phale—in fruitive action; spåhä—aspiration;
iti—thus; mäm—Me; yaù—one who; abhijänäti—does know; karmabhiù—by
the reaction of such work; na—never; saù—he; badhyate—becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

There is no work that affects Me; nor do I aspire for the fruits of action.
One who understands this truth about Me also does not become entangled in
the fruitive reactions of work.

PURPORT

As there are constitutional laws in the material world stating that the king
can do no wrong, or that the king is not subject to the state laws, similarly the
Lord, although He is the creator of this material world, is not affected by the
activities  of  the  material  world.  He  creates  and  remains  aloof  from  the
creation,  whereas  the  living  entities  are  entangled  in  the  fruitive  results  of
material  activities  because  of  their  propensity  for  lording  it  over  material
resources.  The  proprietor  of  an  establishment  is  not  responsible  for  the  right
and  wrong  activities  of  the  workers,  but  the  workers  are  themselves
responsible.  The  living  entities  are  engaged  in  their  respective  activities  of
sense  gratification,  and  these  activities  are  not  ordained  by  the  Lord.  For
advancement of sense gratification, the living entities are engaged in the work
of  this  world,  and  they  aspire  to  heavenly  happiness  after  death.  The  Lord,
being full in Himself, has no attraction for so-called heavenly happiness. The
heavenly demigods are only His engaged servants. The proprietor never desires
the low-grade happiness such as the workers may desire. He is aloof from the
material actions and reactions. For example, the rains are not responsible for
different types of vegetation that appear on the earth, although without such
rains there is no possibility of vegetative growth. Vedic småti confirms this fact
as follows:

nimitta-mätram eväsau
såjyänäà sarga-karmaëi
pradhäna-käraëé-bhütä
yato vai såjya-çaktayaù

“In  the  material  creations,  the  Lord  is  only  the  supreme  cause.  The
immediate cause is material nature, by which the cosmic manifestation is made
visible.”  The  created  beings  are  of  many  varieties,  such  as  the  demigods,
human beings and lower animals, and all of them are subject to the reactions
of  their  past  good  or  bad  activities.  The  Lord  only  gives  them  the  proper
facilities for such activities and the regulations of the modes of nature, but He
is never responsible for their past and present activities. In the Vedänta-sütra
(2.1.34) it is confirmed, vaiñamya-nairghåëye na säpekñatvät: the Lord is never
partial  to  any  living  entity.  The  living  entity  is  responsible  for  his  own  acts.

The Lord only gives him facilities, through the agency of material nature, the
external energy. Anyone who is fully conversant with all the intricacies of this
law of karma, or fruitive activities, does not become affected by the results of
his activities. In other words, the person who understands this transcendental
nature of the Lord is an experienced man in Kåñëa consciousness, and thus he
is  never  subjected  to  the  laws  of  karma.  One  who  does  not  know  the
transcendental  nature  of  the  Lord  and  who  thinks  that  the  activities  of  the
Lord  are  aimed  at  fruitive  results,  as  are  the  activities  of  the  ordinary  living
entities,  certainly  becomes  entangled  himself  in  fruitive  reactions.  But  one
who knows the Supreme Truth is a liberated soul fixed in Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  15

Wv& jaTva k*-Ta& k-MaR PaUvŒriPa MauMau+aui>a" )

ku-å k-MaŒv TaSMaatv& PaUvŒ" PaUvRTar& k*-TaMa( )) 15 ))

evaà jïätvä kåtaà karma
pürvair api mumukñubhiù
kuru karmaiva tasmät tvaà
pürvaiù pürvataraà kåtam

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; jïätvä—knowing well; kåtam—was performed; karma—work;
pürvaiù—by past authorities; api—indeed; mumukñubhiù—who attained
liberation; kuru—just perform; karma—prescribed duty; eva—certainly;
tasmät—therefore; tvam—you; pürvaiù—by the predecessors; pürva-taram—in
ancient times; kåtam—as performed.

TRANSLATION

All the liberated souls in ancient times acted with this understanding of My

transcendental nature. Therefore you should perform your duty, following in
their footsteps.

PURPORT

There  are  two  classes  of  men.  Some  of  them  are  full  of  polluted  material
things  within  their  hearts,  and  some  of  them  are  materially  free.  Kåñëa
consciousness is equally beneficial for both of these persons. Those who are full
of  dirty  things  can  take  to  the  line  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  for  a  gradual
cleansing  process,  following  the  regulative  principles  of  devotional  service.
Those  who  are  already  cleansed  of  the  impurities  may  continue  to  act  in  the
same Kåñëa consciousness so that others may follow their exemplary activities
and thereby be benefited. Foolish persons or neophytes in Kåñëa consciousness
often  want  to  retire  from  activities  without  having  knowledge  of  Kåñëa
consciousness.  Arjuna’s  desire  to  retire  from  activities  on  the  battlefield  was
not approved by the Lord. One need only know how to act. To retire from the
activities  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  to  sit  aloof  making  a  show  of  Kåñëa
consciousness is less important than actually engaging in the field of activities
for  the  sake  of  Kåñëa.  Arjuna  is  here  advised  to  act  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,
following in the footsteps of the Lord’s previous disciples, such as the sun-god
Vivasvän,  as  mentioned  hereinbefore.  The  Supreme  Lord  knows  all  His  past
activities, as well as those of persons who acted in Kåñëa consciousness in the
past. Therefore He recommends the acts of the sun-god, who learned this art
from the Lord some millions of years before. All such students of Lord Kåñëa
are  mentioned  here  as  past  liberated  persons,  engaged  in  the  discharge  of
duties allotted by Kåñëa.

TEXT  16

ik&- k-MaR ik-Mak-MaeRiTa k-vYaae_PYa}a MaaeihTaa" )

Tatae k-MaR Pa[v+YaaiMa YaJjaTva Maae+YaSae_éu>aaTa( )) 16 ))

kià karma kim akarmeti
kavayo ’py atra mohitäù
tat te karma pravakñyämi

yaj jïätvä mokñyase ’çubhät

SYNONYMS

kim—what is; karma—action; kim—what is; akarma—inaction; iti—thus;
kavayaù—the intelligent; api—also; atra—in this matter; mohitäù—are
bewildered; tat—that; te—unto you; karma—work; pravakñyämi—I shall
explain; yat—which; jïätvä—knowing; mokñyase—you will be liberated;
açubhät—from ill fortune.

TRANSLATION

Even the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and what is
inaction. Now I shall explain to you what action is, knowing which you shall be
liberated from all misfortune.

PURPORT

Action  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  has  to  be  executed  in  accord  with  the
examples  of  previous  bona  fide  devotees.  This  is  recommended  in  the  15th
verse.  Why  such  action  should  not  be  independent  will  be  explained  in  the
text to follow.

To  act  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  has  to  follow  the  leadership  of
authorized persons who are in a line of disciplic succession as explained in the
beginning  of  this  chapter.  The  system  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  was  first
narrated  to  the  sun-god,  the  sun-god  explained  it  to  his  son  Manu,  Manu
explained  it  to  his  son  Ikñväku,  and  the  system  is  current  on  this  earth  from
that very remote time. Therefore, one has to follow in the footsteps of previous
authorities  in  the  line  of  disciplic  succession.  Otherwise  even  the  most
intelligent  men  will  be  bewildered  regarding  the  standard  actions  of  Kåñëa
consciousness.  For  this  reason,  the  Lord  decided  to  instruct  Arjuna  in  Kåñëa
consciousness directly. Because of the direct instruction of the Lord to Arjuna,
anyone who follows in the footsteps of Arjuna is certainly not bewildered.

It is said that one cannot ascertain the ways of religion simply by imperfect

experimental  knowledge.  Actually,  the  principles  of  religion  can  only  be  laid
down  by  the  Lord  Himself.  Dharmaà  tu  säkñäd  bhagavat-praëétam  (Bhäg.
6.3.19). No one can manufacture a religious principle by imperfect speculation.
One  must  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  great  authorities  like  Brahmä,  Çiva,
Närada,  Manu,  the  Kumäras,  Kapila,  Prahläda,  Bhéñma,  Çukadeva  Gosvämé,
Yamaräja,  Janaka,  and  Bali  Mahäräja.  By  mental  speculation  one  cannot
ascertain what is religion or self-realization. Therefore, out of causeless mercy
to His devotees, the Lord explains directly to Arjuna what action is and what
inaction is. Only action performed in Kåñëa consciousness can deliver a person
from the entanglement of material existence.

TEXT  17

k-MaR<aae ùiPa baeÖVYa& baeÖVYa& c ivk-MaR<a" )

Ak-MaR<aê baeÖVYa& GahNaa k-MaR<aae GaiTa" )) 17 ))

karmaëo hy api boddhavyaà
boddhavyaà ca vikarmaëaù
akarmaëaç ca boddhavyaà
gahanä karmaëo gatiù

SYNONYMS

karmaëaù—of work; hi—certainly; api—also; boddhavyam—should be
understood; boddhavyam—should be understood; ca—also; vikarmaëaù—of
forbidden work; akarmaëaù—of inaction; ca—also; boddhavyam—should be
understood; gahanä—very difficult; karmaëaù—of work; gatiù—entrance.

TRANSLATION

The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one should

know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what inaction is.

PURPORT

If  one  is  serious  about  liberation  from  material  bondage,  one  has  to
understand  the  distinctions  between  action,  inaction  and  unauthorized
actions.  One  has  to  apply  oneself  to  such  an  analysis  of  action,  reaction  and
perverted  actions  because  it  is  a  very  difficult  subject  matter.  To  understand
Kåñëa consciousness and action according to its modes, one has to learn one’s
relationship with the Supreme; i.e., one who has learned perfectly knows that
every living entity is an eternal servitor of the Lord and that consequently one
has to act in Kåñëa consciousness. The entire Bhagavad-gétä is directed toward
this  conclusion.  Any  other  conclusions,  against  this  consciousness  and  its
attendant  actions,  are  vikarmas,  or  prohibited  actions.  To  understand  all  this
one  has  to  associate  with  authorities  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  learn  the
secret from them; this is as good as learning from the Lord directly. Otherwise,
even the most intelligent persons will be bewildered.

TEXT  18

k-MaR<Yak-MaR Ya" PaXYaedk-MaRi<a c k-MaR Ya" )

Sa buiÖMaaNMaNauZYaezu Sa Yau¢-" k*-Tòk-MaRk*-Ta( )) 18 ))

karmaëy akarma yaù paçyed
akarmaëi ca karma yaù
sa buddhimän manuñyeñu
sa yuktaù kåtsna-karma-kåt

SYNONYMS

karmaëi—in action; akarma—inaction; yaù—one who; paçyet—observes;
akarmaëi—in inaction; ca—also; karma—fruitive action; yaù—one who;
saù—he; buddhi-män—is intelligent; manuñyeñu—in human society; saù—he;
yuktaù—is in the transcendental position; kåtsna-karma-kåt—although
engaged in all activities.

TRANSLATION

One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent among

men, and he is in the transcendental position, although engaged in all sorts of
activities.

PURPORT

A person acting in Kåñëa consciousness is naturally free from the bonds of
karma. His activities are all performed for Kåñëa; therefore he does not enjoy
or suffer any of the effects of work. Consequently he is intelligent in human
society, even though he is engaged in all sorts of activities for Kåñëa. Akarma
means  without  reaction  to  work.  The  impersonalist  ceases  fruitive  activities
out of fear, so that the resultant action may not be a stumbling block on the
path  of  self-realization,  but  the  personalist  knows  rightly  his  position  as  the
eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he engages
himself in the activities of Kåñëa consciousness. Because everything is done for
Kåñëa,  he  enjoys  only  transcendental  happiness  in  the  discharge  of  this
service. Those who are engaged in this process are known to be without desire
for  personal  sense  gratification.  The  sense  of  eternal  servitorship  to  Kåñëa
makes one immune to all sorts of reactionary elements of work.

TEXT  19

YaSYa SaveR SaMaarM>aa" k-aMaSaªLPaviJaRTaa" )

jaNaaiGandGDak-MaaR<a& TaMaahu" Pai<@Ta& buDaa" )) 19 ))

yasya sarve samärambhäù
käma-saìkalpa-varjitäù
jïänägni-dagdha-karmäëaà
tam ähuù paëòitaà budhäù

SYNONYMS

yasya—one whose; sarve—all sorts of; samärambhäù—attempts; käma—based

on desire for sense gratification; saìkalpa—determination; varjitäù—are
devoid of; jïäna—of perfect knowledge; agni—by the fire; dagdha—burned;
karmäëam—whose work; tam—him; ähuù—declare; paëòitam—learned;
budhäù—those who know.

TRANSLATION

One is understood to be in full knowledge whose every endeavor is devoid of

desire for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be a worker for whom the
reactions of work have been burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.

PURPORT

Only a person in full knowledge can understand the activities of a person in
Kåñëa  consciousness.  Because  the  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  devoid  of
all kinds of sense-gratificatory propensities, it is to be understood that he has
burned up the reactions of his work by perfect knowledge of his constitutional
position as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is
actually 
learned  who  has  attained  to  such  perfection  of  knowledge.
Development of this knowledge of eternal servitorship to the Lord is compared
to fire. Such a fire, once kindled, can burn up all kinds of reactions to work.

TEXT  20

TYa¤-a k-MaRf-l/aSa®& iNaTYaTa*áae iNaraé[Ya" )

k-MaR<Yai>aPa[v*taae_iPa NaEv ik-iÄTk-raeiTa Sa" )) 20 ))

tyaktvä karma-phaläsaìgaà
nitya-tåpto niräçrayaù
karmaëy abhipravåtto ’pi
naiva kiïcit karoti saù

SYNONYMS

tyaktvä—having given up; karma-phala-äsaìgam—attachment for fruitive
results; nitya—always; tåptaù—being satisfied; niräçrayaù—without any
shelter; karmaëi—in activity; abhipravåttaù—being fully engaged; api—in
spite of; na—does not; eva—certainly; kiïcit—anything; karoti—do; saù—he.

TRANSLATION

Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever satisfied and

independent, he performs no fruitive action, although engaged in all kinds of
undertakings.

PURPORT

This  freedom  from  the  bondage  of  actions  is  possible  only  in  Kåñëa
consciousness,  when  one  is  doing  everything  for  Kåñëa.  A  Kåñëa  conscious
person  acts  out  of  pure  love  for  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and
therefore  he  has  no  attraction  for  the  results  of  the  action.  He  is  not  even
attached to his personal maintenance, for everything is left to Kåñëa. Nor is he
anxious  to  secure  things,  nor  to  protect  things  already  in  his  possession.  He
does his duty to the best of his ability and leaves everything to Kåñëa. Such an
unattached person is always free from the resultant reactions of good and bad;
it  is  as  though  he  were  not  doing  anything.  This  is  the  sign  of  akarma,  or
actions  without  fruitive  reactions.  Any  other  action,  therefore,  devoid  of
Kåñëa consciousness, is binding upon the worker, and that is the real aspect of
vikarma, as explained hereinbefore.

TEXT  21

iNaraXaqYaRTaictaaTMaa TYa¢-SavRPairGa]h" )

Xaarqr& ke-vl&/ k-MaR ku-vRàaPanaeiTa ik-iLbzMa( )) 21 ))

niräçér yata-cittätmä
tyakta-sarva-parigrahaù
çäréraà kevalaà karma

kurvan näpnoti kilbiñam

SYNONYMS

niräçéù—without desire for the result; yata—controlled; citta-ätmä—mind and
intelligence; tyakta—giving up; sarva—all; parigrahaù—sense of
proprietorship over possessions; çäréram—in keeping body and soul together;
kevalam—only; karma—work; kurvan—doing; na—never; äpnoti—does
acquire; kilbiñam—sinful reactions.

TRANSLATION

Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly
controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessions, and acts
only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is not affected by sinful
reactions.

PURPORT

A  Kåñëa  conscious  person  does  not  expect  good  or  bad  results  in  his
activities.  His  mind  and  intelligence  are  fully  controlled.  He  knows  that
because he is part and parcel of the Supreme, the part played by him, as a part
and parcel of the whole, is not his own activity but is only being done through
him by the Supreme. When the hand moves, it does not move out of its own
accord,  but  by  the  endeavor  of  the  whole  body.  A  Kåñëa  conscious  person  is
always  dovetailed  with  the  supreme  desire,  for  he  has  no  desire  for  personal
sense  gratification.  He  moves  exactly  like a part of a machine. As a machine
part  requires  oiling  and  cleaning  for  maintenance,  so  a  Kåñëa  conscious  man
maintains  himself  by  his  work  just  to  remain  fit  for  action  in  the
transcendental  loving  service  of  the  Lord.  He  is  therefore  immune  to  all  the
reactions of his endeavors. Like an animal, he has no proprietorship even over
his own body. A cruel proprietor of an animal sometimes kills the animal in his
possession,  yet  the  animal  does  not  protest.  Nor  does  it  have  any  real
independence. A Kåñëa conscious person, fully engaged in self-realization, has

very little time to falsely possess any material object. For maintaining body and
soul,  he  does  not  require  unfair  means  of  accumulating  money.  He  does  not,
therefore,  become  contaminated  by  such  material  sins.  He  is  free  from  all
reactions to his actions.

TEXT  22

Yad*C^al/a>aSaNTauíae ÜNÜaTaqTaae ivMaTSar" )

SaMa" iSaÖaviSaÖaE c k*-TvaiPa Na iNabDYaTae )) 22 ))

yadåcchä-läbha-santuñöo
dvandvätéto vimatsaraù
samaù siddhäv asiddhau ca
kåtväpi na nibadhyate

SYNONYMS

yadåcchä—out of its own accord; läbha—with gain; santuñöaù—satisfied;
dvandva—duality; atétaù—surpassed; vimatsaraù—free from envy;
samaù—steady; siddhau—in success; asiddhau—failure; ca—also;
kåtvä—doing; api—although; na—never; nibadhyate—becomes affected.

TRANSLATION

He who is satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord, who is free
from duality and does not envy, who is steady in both success and failure, is
never entangled, although performing actions.

PURPORT

A Kåñëa conscious person does not make much endeavor even to maintain
his body. He is satisfied with gains which are obtained of their own accord. He
neither begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far as is in his power, and is
satisfied  with  whatever  is  obtained  by  his  own  honest  labor.  He  is  therefore

independent  in  his  livelihood.  He  does  not  allow  anyone’s  service  to  hamper
his own service in Kåñëa consciousness. However, for the service of the Lord
he can participate in any kind of action without being disturbed by the duality
of the material world. The duality of the material world is felt in terms of heat
and cold, or misery and happiness. A Kåñëa conscious person is above duality
because  he  does  not  hesitate  to  act  in  any  way  for  the  satisfaction  of  Kåñëa.
Therefore  he  is  steady  both  in  success  and  in  failure.  These  signs  are  visible
when one is fully in transcendental knowledge.

TEXT  23

GaTaSa®SYa Mau¢-SYa jaNaaviSQaTaceTaSa" )

YajaYaacrTa" k-MaR SaMaGa]& Pa[ivl/IYaTae )) 23 ))

gata-saìgasya muktasya
jïänävasthita-cetasaù
yajïäyäcarataù karma
samagraà praviléyate

SYNONYMS

gata-saìgasya—of one unattached to the modes of material nature;
muktasya—of the liberated; jïäna-avasthita—situated in transcendence;
cetasaù—whose wisdom; yajïäya—for the sake of Yajïa (Kåñëa);
äcarataù—acting; karma—work; samagram—in total; praviléyate—merges
entirely.

TRANSLATION

The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and

who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely into
transcendence.

PURPORT

Becoming fully Kåñëa conscious, one is freed from all dualities and thus is
free from the contaminations of the material modes. He can become liberated
because  he  knows  his  constitutional  position  in  relationship  with  Kåñëa,  and
thus  his  mind  cannot  be  drawn  from  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Consequently,
whatever he does, he does for Kåñëa, who is the primeval Viñëu. Therefore, all
his  works  are  technically  sacrifices  because  sacrifice  aims  at  satisfying  the
Supreme  Person,  Viñëu,  Kåñëa.  The  resultant  reactions  to  all  such  work
certainly merge into transcendence, and one does not suffer material effects.

TEXT  24

b]øaPaR<a& b]ø hivb]RøaGanaE b]ø<aa huTaMa( )

b]øEv TaeNa GaNTaVYa& b]øk-MaRSaMaaiDaNaa )) 24 ))

brahmärpaëaà brahma havir
brahmägnau brahmaëä hutam
brahmaiva tena gantavyaà
brahma-karma-samädhinä

SYNONYMS

brahma—spiritual in nature; arpaëam—contribution; brahma—the Supreme;
haviù—butter; brahma—spiritual; agnau—in the fire of consummation;
brahmaëä—by the spirit soul; hutam—offered; brahma—spiritual kingdom;
eva—certainly; tena—by him; gantavyam—to be reached; brahma—spiritual;
karma—in activities; samädhinä—by complete absorption.

TRANSLATION

A person who is fully absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness is sure to attain the

spiritual kingdom because of his full contribution to spiritual activities, in
which the consummation is absolute and that which is offered is of the same
spiritual nature.

PURPORT

How  activities  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  can  lead  one  ultimately  to  the
spiritual  goal  is  described  here.  There  are  various  activities  in  Kåñëa
consciousness,  and  all  of  them  will  be  described  in  the  following  verses.  But,
for  the  present,  just  the  principle  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  described.  A
conditioned  soul,  entangled  in  material  contamination,  is  sure  to  act  in  the
material  atmosphere,  and  yet  he  has  to  get  out  of  such  an  environment.  The
process by which the conditioned soul can get out of the material atmosphere
is Kåñëa consciousness. For example, a patient who is suffering from a disorder
of the bowels due to overindulgence in milk products is cured by another milk
product, namely curds. The materially absorbed conditioned soul can be cured
by Kåñëa consciousness as set forth here in the Gétä. This process is generally
known  as  yajïa,  or  activities  (sacrifices)  simply  meant  for  the  satisfaction  of
Viñëu, or Kåñëa. The more the activities of the material world are performed
in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  or  for Viñëu only, the more the atmosphere becomes
spiritualized  by  complete  absorption.  The  word  brahma  (Brahman)  means
“spiritual.” The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of His transcendental body are
called brahmajyoti, His spiritual effulgence. Everything that exists is situated in
that  brahmajyoti,  but  when  the  jyoti  is  covered  by  illusion  (mäyä)  or  sense
gratification, it is called material. This material veil can be removed at once by
Kåñëa consciousness; thus the offering for the sake of Kåñëa consciousness, the
consuming  agent  of  such  an  offering  or  contribution,  the  process  of
combined
consumption, 
together—Brahman,  or  the  Absolute  Truth.  The  Absolute  Truth  covered  by
mäyä  is  called  matter.  Matter  dovetailed  for  the  cause  of  the  Absolute  Truth
regains  its  spiritual  quality.  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  the  process  of  converting
the  illusory  consciousness  into  Brahman,  or  the  Supreme.  When  the  mind  is
fully  absorbed  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  it  is  said  to  be  in  samädhi,  or  trance.
Anything  done  in  such  transcendental  consciousness  is  called  yajïa,  or
sacrifice  for  the  Absolute.  In  that  condition  of  spiritual  consciousness,  the
contributor, the contribution, the consumption, the performer or leader of the
performance,  and  the  result  or  ultimate  gain—everything—becomes  one  in

contributor,  and 

result  are—all 

the 

the 

the  Absolute,  the  Supreme  Brahman.  That  is  the  method  of  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  25

dEvMaevaPare Yaj& YaaeiGaNa" PaYauRPaaSaTae )

b]øaGanavPare Yaj& YajeNaEvaePaJauûiTa )) 25 ))

daivam eväpare yajïaà
yoginaù paryupäsate
brahmägnäv apare yajïaà
yajïenaivopajuhvati

SYNONYMS

daivam—in worshiping the demigods; eva—like this; apare—some others;
yajïam—sacrifices; yoginaù—mystics; paryupäsate—worship perfectly;
brahma—of the Absolute Truth; agnau—in the fire; apare—others;
yajïam—sacrifice; yajïena—by sacrifice; eva—thus; upajuhvati—offer.

TRANSLATION

Some yogés perfectly worship the demigods by offering different sacrifices to

them, and some of them offer sacrifices in the fire of the Supreme Brahman.

PURPORT

As  described  above,  a  person  engaged  in  discharging  duties  in  Kåñëa
consciousness is also called a perfect yogé or a first-class mystic. But there are
others also, who perform similar sacrifices in the worship of demigods, and still
others who sacrifice to the Supreme Brahman, or the impersonal feature of the
Supreme  Lord.  So  there  are  different  kinds of sacrifices in terms of different
categories.  Such  different  categories  of  sacrifice  by  different  types  of
performers  only  superficially  demark  varieties  of  sacrifice.  Factually  sacrifice

means to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Viñëu, who is also known as Yajïa. All the
different  varieties  of  sacrifice  can  be  placed  within  two  primary  divisions:
in  pursuit  of
namely,  sacrifice  of  worldly  possessions  and  sacrifice 
transcendental knowledge. Those who are in Kåñëa consciousness sacrifice all
material  possessions  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  while  others,
who  want  some  temporary  material  happiness,  sacrifice  their  material
possessions to satisfy demigods such as Indra, the sun-god, etc. And others, who
are  impersonalists,  sacrifice  their  identity  by  merging  into  the  existence  of
impersonal Brahman. The demigods are powerful living entities appointed by
the  Supreme  Lord  for  the  maintenance  and  supervision  of  all  material
functions  like  the  heating,  watering  and  lighting  of  the  universe.  Those  who
are  interested  in  material  benefits  worship  the  demigods  by  various  sacrifices
according to the Vedic rituals. They are called bahv-éçvara-vädé, or believers in
many  gods.  But  others,  who  worship  the  impersonal  feature  of  the  Absolute
Truth  and  regard  the  forms  of  the  demigods  as  temporary,  sacrifice  their
individual selves in the supreme fire and thus end their individual existences
by  merging  into  the  existence  of  the  Supreme.  Such  impersonalists  sacrifice
their  time  in  philosophical  speculation  to  understand  the  transcendental
nature  of  the  Supreme.  In  other  words,  the  fruitive  workers  sacrifice  their
material  possessions  for  material  enjoyment,  whereas  the  impersonalist
sacrifices his material designations with a view to merging into the existence
of the Supreme. For the impersonalist, the fire altar of sacrifice is the Supreme
Brahman, and the offering is the self being consumed by the fire of Brahman.
The  Kåñëa  conscious  person,  like  Arjuna,  however,  sacrifices  everything  for
the  satisfaction  of  Kåñëa,  and  thus  all  his  material  possessions  as  well  as  his
own self—everything—is sacrificed for Kåñëa. Thus, he is the first-class yogé;
but he does not lose his individual existence.

TEXT  26

é[ae}aadqNaqiNd]Yaa<YaNYae Sa&YaMaaiGanzu JauûiTa )

XaBdadqiNvzYaaNaNYa wiNd]YaaiGanzu JauûiTa )) 26 ))

çroträdénéndriyäëy anye
saàyamägniñu juhvati
çabdädén viñayän anya
indriyägniñu juhvati

SYNONYMS

çrotra-ädéni—such as the hearing process; indriyäëi—senses; anye—others;
saàyama—of restraint; agniñu—in the fires; juhvati—offer;
çabda-ädén—sound vibration, etc.; viñayän—objects of sense gratification;
anye—others; indriya—of the sense organs; agniñu—in the fires; juhvati—they
sacrifice.

TRANSLATION

Some [the unadulterated brahmacärés] sacrifice the hearing process and the

senses in the fire of mental control, and others [the regulated householders]
sacrifice the objects of the senses in the fire of the senses.

PURPORT

The  members  of  the  four  divisions  of  human  life,  namely  the  brahmacäré,
the gåhastha, the vänaprastha and the sannyäsé, are all meant to become perfect
yogés  or  transcendentalists.  Since  human  life  is  not  meant  for  our  enjoying
sense  gratification  like  the  animals,  the  four  orders  of  human  life  are  so
arranged  that  one  may  become  perfect  in  spiritual  life.  The  brahmacärés,  or
students  under  the  care  of  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master,  control  the  mind  by
abstaining from sense gratification. A brahmacäré hears only words concerning
Kåñëa  consciousness;  hearing  is  the  basic  principle  for  understanding,  and
therefore 
harer
nämänukértanam—chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. He restrains
himself from the vibrations of material sounds, and his hearing is engaged in
the transcendental sound vibration of Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa. Similarly, the
householders, who have some license for sense gratification, perform such acts

brahmacäré 

engages 

fully 

pure 

the 

in 

with  great  restraint.  Sex  life,  intoxication  and  meat-eating  are  general
tendencies of human society, but a regulated householder does not indulge in
unrestricted sex life and other sense gratification. Marriage on the principles
of religious life is therefore current in all civilized human society because that
is  the  way  for  restricted  sex  life.  This  restricted,  unattached  sex  life  is  also  a
kind  of  yajïa  because  the  restricted  householder  sacrifices  his  general
tendency toward sense gratification for higher, transcendental life.

TEXT  27

SavaR<aqiNd]Yak-MaaRi<a Pa[a<ak-MaaRi<a caPare )

AaTMaSa&YaMaYaaeGaaGanaE JauûiTa jaNadqiPaTae )) 27 ))

sarväëéndriya-karmäëi
präëa-karmäëi cäpare
ätma-saàyama-yogägnau
juhvati jïäna-dépite

SYNONYMS

sarväëi—of all; indriya—the senses; karmäëi—functions;
präëa-karmäëi—functions of the life breath; ca—also; apare—others;
ätma-saàyama—of controlling the mind; yoga—the linking process;
agnau—in the fire of; juhvati—offer; jïäna-dépite—because of the urge for
self-realization.

TRANSLATION

Others, who are interested in achieving self-realization through control of
the mind and senses, offer the functions of all the senses, and of the life breath,
as oblations into the fire of the controlled mind.

PURPORT

The  yoga  system  conceived  by  Pataïjali  is  referred  to  herein.  In  the
Yoga-sütra of Pataïjali, the soul is called pratyag-ätmä and paräg-ätmä. As long
as the soul is attached to sense enjoyment it is called paräg-ätmä, but as soon as
the  same  soul  becomes  detached  from  such  sense  enjoyment  it  is  called
pratyag-ätmä. The soul is subjected to the functions of ten kinds of air at work
within  the  body,  and  this  is  perceived  through  the  breathing  system.  The
Pataïjali system of yoga instructs one on how to control the functions of the
body’s air in a technical manner so that ultimately all the functions of the air
within  become  favorable  for  purifying  the  soul  of  material  attachment.
According  to  this  yoga  system,  pratyag-ätmä  is  the  ultimate  goal.  This
pratyag-ätmä is withdrawn from activities in matter. The senses interact with
the  sense  objects,  like  the  ear  for  hearing,  eyes  for  seeing,  nose  for  smelling,
tongue  for  tasting,  hand  for  touching,  and  all  of  them  are  thus  engaged  in
activities outside the self. They are called the functions of the präëa-väyu. The
apäna-väyu  goes  downwards,  vyäna-väyu  acts  to  shrink  and  expand,
samäna-väyu adjusts equilibrium, udäna-väyu goes upwards—and when one is
enlightened, one engages all these in searching for self-realization.

TEXT  28

d]VYaYajaSTaPaaeYaja YaaeGaYajaSTaQaaPare )

SvaDYaaYajaNaYajaê YaTaYa" Sa&iXaTav]Taa" )) 28 ))

dravya-yajïäs tapo-yajïä
yoga-yajïäs tathäpare
svädhyäya-jïäna-yajïäç ca
yatayaù saàçita-vratäù

SYNONYMS

dravya-yajïäù—sacrificing one’s possessions; tapaù-yajïäù—sacrifice in
austerities; yoga-yajïäù—sacrifice in eightfold mysticism; tathä—thus;
apare—others; svädhyäya—sacrifice in the study of the Vedas;

jïäna-yajïäù—sacrifice in advancement of transcendental knowledge;
ca—also; yatayaù—enlightened persons; saàçita-vratäù—taken to strict vows.

TRANSLATION

Having accepted strict vows, some become enlightened by sacrificing their
possessions, and others by performing severe austerities, by practicing the yoga
of eightfold mysticism, or by studying the Vedas to advance in transcendental
knowledge.

PURPORT

These sacrifices may be fitted into various divisions. There are persons who
are  sacrificing  their  possessions  in  the  form  of  various  kinds  of  charities.  In
India, the rich mercantile community or princely orders open various kinds of
charitable  institutions  like  dharma-çälä,  anna-kñetra,  atithi-çälä,  anäthälaya
and  vidyä-péöha.  In  other  countries,  too,  there  are  many  hospitals,  old  age
homes  and  similar  charitable  foundations  meant  for  distributing  food,
education  and  medical  treatment  free  to  the  poor.  All  these  charitable
activities  are  called  dravyamaya-yajïa.  There  are  others  who,  for  higher
elevation  in  life  or  for  promotion  to  higher  planets  within  the  universe,
voluntarily  accept  many  kinds  of  austerities  such  as  candräyaëa  and
cäturmäsya.  These  processes  entail  severe  vows  for  conducting  life  under
certain rigid rules. For example, under the cäturmäsya vow the candidate does
not shave for four months during the year (July to October), he does not eat
certain  foods,  does  not  eat  twice  in  a  day  or  does  not  leave  home.  Such
sacrifice of the comforts of life is called tapomaya-yajïa. There are still others
who  engage  themselves  in  different  kinds  of  mystic  yogas  like  the  Pataïjali
system  (for  merging  into  the  existence  of  the  Absolute),  or  haöha-yoga  or
añöäìga-yoga (for particular perfections). And some travel to all the sanctified
places  of  pilgrimage.  All  these  practices  are  called  yoga-yajïa,  sacrifice  for  a
certain type of perfection in the material world. There are others who engage
themselves  in  the  studies  of  different  Vedic  literatures,  specifically  the
Upaniñads  and  Vedänta-sütras,  or  the  Säìkhya  philosophy.  All  of  these  are

called  svädhyäya-yajïa.  or  engagement  in  the  sacrifice  of  studies.  All  these
yogés  are  faithfully  engaged  in  different  types  of  sacrifice  and  are  seeking  a
higher  status  of  life.  Kåñëa  consciousness,  however,  is  different  from  these
because  it  is  the  direct  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Kåñëa  consciousness
cannot  be  attained  by  any  one  of  the  above-mentioned  types  of  sacrifice  but
can  be  attained  only  by  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  and  His  bona  fide  devotees.
Therefore, Kåñëa consciousness is transcendental.

TEXT  29

APaaNae JauûiTa Pa[a<a& Pa[a<ae_PaaNa& TaQaaPare )

Pa[a<aaPaaNaGaTaq åd(ßa Pa[a<aaYaaMaParaYa<aa" )

APare iNaYaTaahara" Pa[a<aaNPa[a<aezu JauûiTa )) 29 ))

apäne juhvati präëaà
präëe ’pänaà tathäpare
präëäpäna-gaté ruddhvä
präëäyäma-paräyaëäù
apare niyatähäräù
präëän präëeñu juhvati

SYNONYMS

apäne—in the air which acts downward; juhvati—offer; präëam—the air
which acts outward; präëe—in the air going outward; apänam—the air going
downward; tathä—as also; apare—others; präëa—of the air going outward;
apäna—and the air going downward; gaté—the movement;
ruddhvä—checking; präëa-äyäma—trance induced by stopping all breathing;
paräyaëäù—so inclined; apare—others; niyata—having controlled;
ähäräù—eating; präëän—the outgoing air; präëeñu—in the outgoing air;
juhvati—sacrifice.

TRANSLATION

Still others, who are inclined to the process of breath restraint to remain in

trance, practice by offering the movement of the outgoing breath into the
incoming, and the incoming breath into the outgoing, and thus at last remain in
trance, stopping all breathing. Others, curtailing the eating process, offer the
outgoing breath into itself as a sacrifice.

PURPORT

This  system  of  yoga  for  controlling  the  breathing  process  is  called
präëäyäma,  and  in  the  beginning  it  is  practiced  in  the  haöha-yoga  system
through different sitting postures. All of these processes are recommended for
controlling  the  senses  and  for  advancement  in  spiritual  realization.  This
practice  involves  controlling  the  airs  within  the  body  so  as  to  reverse  the
directions  of  their  passage.  The  apäna  air  goes  downward,  and  the  präëa  air
goes  up.  The  präëäyäma-yogé  practices  breathing  the  opposite  way  until  the
currents are neutralized into püraka. equilibrium. Offering the exhaled breath
into the inhaled breath is called recaka. When both air currents are completely
stopped, one is said to be in kumbhaka-yoga. By practice of kumbhaka-yoga. one
can  increase  the  duration  of  life  for  perfection  in  spiritual  realization.  The
intelligent yogé is interested in attaining perfection in one life, without waiting
for the next. For by practicing kumbhaka-yoga. the yogés increase the duration
of life by many, many years. A Kåñëa conscious person, however, being always
situated  in  the  transcendental  loving  service  of  the  Lord,  automatically
becomes the controller of the senses. His senses, being always engaged in the
service  of  Kåñëa,  have  no  chance  of  becoming  otherwise  engaged.  So  at  the
end  of  life,  he  is  naturally  transferred  to  the  transcendental  plane  of  Lord
Kåñëa;  consequently  he  makes  no  attempt  to  increase  his  longevity.  He  is  at
once raised to the platform of liberation, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):

mäà ca yo ’vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate

“One  who  engages  in  unalloyed  devotional  service  to  the  Lord  transcends
the  modes  of  material  nature  and  is  immediately  elevated  to  the  spiritual
platform.” A Kåñëa conscious person begins from the transcendental stage, and
he is constantly in that consciousness. Therefore, there is no falling down, and
ultimately he enters into the abode of the Lord without delay. The practice of
reduced  eating  is  automatically  done  when  one  eats  only  kåñëa-prasädam,  or
food  which  is  offered  first  to  the  Lord.  Reducing  the  eating  process  is  very
helpful in the matter of sense control. And without sense control there is no
possibility of getting out of the material entanglement.

TEXT  30

SaveR_PYaeTae Yajivdae Yaj+aiPaTak-LMaza" )

YajiXaíaMa*Ta>auJaae YaaiNTa b]ø SaNaaTaNaMa( )) 30 ))

sarve ’py ete yajïa-vido
yajïa-kñapita-kalmañäù
yajïa-çiñöämåta-bhujo
yänti brahma sanätanam

SYNONYMS

sarve—all; api—although apparently different; ete—these;
yajïa-vidaù—conversant with the purpose of performing sacrifices;
yajïa-kñapita—being cleansed as the result of such performances;
kalmañäù—of sinful reactions; yajïa-çiñöa—of the result of such performances
of yajïa; amåta-bhujaù—those who have tasted such nectar; yänti—do
approach; brahma—the supreme; sanätanam—eternal atmosphere.

TRANSLATION

All these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed of

sinful reactions, and, having tasted the nectar of the results of sacrifices, they

advance toward the supreme eternal atmosphere.

PURPORT

From  the  foregoing  explanation  of  different  types  of  sacrifice  (namely
sacrifice of one’s possessions, study of the Vedas or philosophical doctrines, and
performance of the yoga system), it is found that the common aim of all is to
control the senses. Sense gratification is the root cause of material existence;
therefore,  unless  and  until  one  is  situated  on  a  platform  apart  from  sense
gratification,  there  is  no  chance  of  being  elevated  to  the  eternal  platform  of
full  knowledge,  full  bliss  and  full  life.  This  platform  is  in  the  eternal
atmosphere, or Brahman atmosphere. All the above-mentioned sacrifices help
one  to  become  cleansed  of  the  sinful  reactions  of  material  existence.  By  this
advancement in life, not only does one become happy and opulent in this life,
but also, at the end, he enters into the eternal kingdom of God, either merging
into  the  impersonal  Brahman  or  associating  with  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, Kåñëa.

TEXT  31

NaaYa& l/aek-ae_STYaYajSYa ku-Taae_NYa" ku-åSataMa )) 31 ))

näyaà loko ’sty ayajïasya
kuto ’nyaù kuru-sattama

SYNONYMS

na—never; ayam—this; lokaù—planet; asti—there is; ayajïasya—for one who
performs no sacrifice; kutaù—where is; anyaù—the other; kuru-sat-tama—O
best amongst the Kurus.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Kuru dynasty, without sacrifice one can never live happily on

this planet or in this life: what then of the next?

PURPORT

Whatever form of material existence one is in, one is invariably ignorant of
his real situation. In other words, existence in the material world is due to the
multiple reactions to our sinful lives. Ignorance is the cause of sinful life, and
sinful life is the cause of one’s dragging on in material existence. The human
form  of  life  is  the  only  loophole  by  which  one  may  get  out  of  this
entanglement.  The  Vedas,  therefore,  give  us  a  chance  for  escape  by  pointing
out the paths of religion, economic comfort, regulated sense gratification and,
at last, the means to get out of the miserable condition entirely. The path of
religion, or the different kinds of sacrifice recommended above, automatically
solves  our  economic  problems.  By  performance  of  yajïa  we  can  have  enough
food,  enough  milk,  etc.—even  if  there  is  a  so-called  increase  of  population.
When  the  body  is  fully  supplied,  naturally  the  next  stage  is  to  satisfy  the
senses.  The  Vedas  prescribe,  therefore,  sacred  marriage  for  regulated  sense
gratification. Thereby one is gradually elevated to the platform of release from
material  bondage,  and  the  highest  perfection  of  liberated  life  is  to  associate
with  the  Supreme  Lord.  Perfection  is  achieved  by  performance  of  yajïa
(sacrifice),  as  described  above.  Now,  if  a  person  is  not  inclined  to  perform
yajïa according to the Vedas, how can he expect a happy life even in this body,
and  what  to  speak  of  another  body  on  another  planet?  There  are  different
grades of material comforts in different heavenly planets, and in all cases there
is immense happiness for persons engaged in different kinds of yajïa. But the
highest  kind  of  happiness  that  a  man  can  achieve  is  to  be  promoted  to  the
spiritual  planets  by  practice  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  A  life  of  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  therefore  the  solution  to  all  the  problems  of  material
existence.

TEXT  32

Wv& bhuivDaa Yaja ivTaTaa b]ø<aae Mau%e )

k-MaRJaaiNviÖ TaaNSavaRNaev& jaTva ivMaae+YaSae )) 32 ))

evaà bahu-vidhä yajïä
vitatä brahmaëo mukhe
karma-jän viddhi tän sarvän
evaà jïätvä vimokñyase

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; bahu-vidhäù—various kinds of; yajïäù—sacrifices; vitatäù—are
spread; brahmaëaù—of the Vedas; mukhe—through the mouth;
karma-jän—born of work; viddhi—you should know; tän—them; sarvän—all;
evam—thus; jïätvä—knowing; vimokñyase—you will be liberated.

TRANSLATION

All these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas, and all of

them are born of different types of work. Knowing them as such, you will
become liberated.

PURPORT

Different types of sacrifice, as discussed above, are mentioned in the Vedas
to suit the different types of worker. Because men are so deeply absorbed in the
bodily concept, these sacrifices are so arranged that one can work either with
the  body,  with  the  mind,  or  with  the  intelligence.  But  all  of  them  are
recommended  for  ultimately  bringing  about  liberation  from  the  body.  This  is
confirmed by the Lord herewith from His own mouth.

TEXT  33

é[eYaaNd]VYaMaYaaÛjaJjaNaYaj" ParNTaPa )

Sav| k-MaaRi%l&/ PaaQaR jaNae PairSaMaaPYaTae )) 33 ))

çreyän dravya-mayäd yajïäj
jïäna-yajïaù parantapa
sarvaà karmäkhilaà pärtha
jïäne parisamäpyate

SYNONYMS

çreyän—greater; dravya-mayät—of material possessions; yajïät—than the
sacrifice; jïäna-yajïaù—sacrifice in knowledge; parantapa—O chastiser of the
enemy; sarvam—all; karma—activities; akhilam—in totality; pärtha—O son of
Påthä; jïäne—in knowledge; parisamäpyate—end.

TRANSLATION

O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice performed in knowledge is better than
the mere sacrifice of material possessions. After all, O son of Påthä, all sacrifices
of work culminate in transcendental knowledge.

PURPORT

to 

service 

The purpose of all sacrifices is to arrive at the status of complete knowledge,
then to gain release from material miseries, and, ultimately, to engage in loving
the  Supreme  Lord  (Kåñëa  consciousness).
transcendental 
Nonetheless, there is a mystery about all these different activities of sacrifice,
and  one  should  know  this  mystery.  Sacrifices  sometimes  take  different  forms
according  to  the  particular  faith  of  the  performer.  When  one’s  faith  reaches
the  stage  of  transcendental  knowledge,  the  performer  of  sacrifices  should  be
considered more advanced than those who simply sacrifice material possessions
without  such  knowledge,  for  without  attainment  of  knowledge,  sacrifices
remain  on  the  material  platform  and  bestow  no  spiritual  benefit.  Real
in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  the  highest  stage  of
knowledge  culminates 
transcendental knowledge. Without the elevation of knowledge, sacrifices are
simply  material  activities.  When,  however,  they  are  elevated  to  the  level  of
transcendental knowledge, all such activities enter onto the spiritual platform.

Depending on differences in consciousness, sacrificial activities are sometimes
called  karma-käëòa 
jïäna-käëòa
(fruitive  activities)  and 
(knowledge in the pursuit of truth). It is better when the end is knowledge.

sometimes 

TEXT  34

TaiÜiÖ Pa[i<aPaaTaeNa PairPa[éneNa SaevYaa )

oPade+YaiNTa Tae jaNa& jaiNaNaSTatvdiXaRNa" )) 34 ))

"tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù

SYNONYMS

tat—that knowledge of different sacrifices; viddhi—try to understand;
praëipätena—by approaching a spiritual master; paripraçnena—by submissive
inquiries; sevayä—by the rendering of service; upadekñyanti—they will
initiate; te—you; jïänam—into knowledge; jïäninaù—the self-realized;
tattva—of the truth; darçinaù—seers.

TRANSLATION

Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from

him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized souls can
impart knowledge unto you because they have seen the truth.

PURPORT

The  path  of  spiritual  realization  is  undoubtedly  difficult.  The  Lord
therefore  advises  us  to  approach  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master  in  the  line  of
disciplic succession from the Lord Himself. No one can be a bona fide spiritual
master without following this principle of disciplic succession. The Lord is the

tu 

says, 

(6.3.19) 

dharmaà 

original  spiritual  master,  and  a  person  in  the  disciplic  succession  can  convey
the  message  of  the  Lord  as  it  is  to  his  disciple.  No  one  can  be  spiritually
realized  by  manufacturing  his  own  process,  as  is  the  fashion  of  the  foolish
pretenders.  The  Bhägavatam 
säkñäd
bhagavat-praëétam:  the  path  of  religion  is  directly  enunciated  by  the  Lord.
Therefore,  mental  speculation  or  dry  arguments  cannot  help  lead  one  to  the
right path. Nor by independent study of books of knowledge can one progress
in spiritual life. One has to approach a bona fide spiritual master to receive the
knowledge.  Such  a  spiritual  master  should  be  accepted  in  full  surrender,  and
one  should  serve  the  spiritual  master  like  a  menial  servant,  without  false
prestige.  Satisfaction  of  the  self-realized  spiritual  master  is  the  secret  of
advancement  in  spiritual  life.  Inquiries  and  submission  constitute  the  proper
combination  for  spiritual  understanding.  Unless  there  is  submission  and
service,  inquiries  from  the  learned  spiritual master will not be effective. One
must  be  able  to  pass  the  test  of  the  spiritual  master,  and  when  he  sees  the
genuine  desire  of  the  disciple,  he  automatically  blesses  the  disciple  with
genuine spiritual understanding. In this verse, both blind following and absurd
inquiries  are  condemned.  Not  only  should  one  hear  submissively  from  the
spiritual  master,  but  one  must  also  get  a  clear  understanding  from  him,  in
submission and service and inquiries. A bona fide spiritual master is by nature
very kind toward the disciple. Therefore when the student is submissive and is
always  ready  to  render  service,  the  reciprocation  of  knowledge  and  inquiries
becomes perfect.

TEXT  35

YaJjaTva Na PauNaMaaeRhMaev& YaaSYaiSa Paa<@v )

YaeNa >aUTaaNYaXaezai<a d]+YaSYaaTMaNYaQaae MaiYa )) 35 ))

yaj jïätvä na punar moham
evaà yäsyasi päëòava
yena bhütäny açeñäëi
drakñyasy ätmany atho mayi

SYNONYMS

yat—which; jïätvä—knowing; na—never; punaù—again; moham—to illusion;
evam—like this; yäsyasi—you shall go; päëòava—O son of Päëòu; yena—by
which; bhütäni—living entities; açeñäëi—all; drakñyasi—you will see;
ätmani—in the Supreme Soul; atha u—or in other words; mayi—in Me.

TRANSLATION

Having obtained real knowledge from a self-realized soul, you will never fall
again into such illusion, for by this knowledge you will see that all living beings
are but part of the Supreme, or, in other words, that they are Mine.

PURPORT

The  result  of  receiving  knowledge  from  a  self-realized  soul,  or  one  who
knows things as they are, is learning that all living beings are parts and parcels
of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Lord  Çré  Kåñëa.  The  sense  of  an
existence separate from Kåñëa is called mäyä (mä—not, yä—this). Some think
that  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  Kåñëa,  that  Kåñëa  is  only  a  great  historical
personality and that the Absolute is the impersonal Brahman. Factually, as it is
stated  in  the  Bhagavad-gétä,  this  impersonal  Brahman  is  the  personal
effulgence  of  Kåñëa.  Kåñëa,  as  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  is  the
cause of everything. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is clearly stated that Kåñëa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. Even the millions of
incarnations  are  only  His  different  expansions.  Similarly,  the  living  entities
are  also  expansions  of  Kåñëa.  The  Mäyävädé  philosophers  wrongly  think  that
Kåñëa loses His own separate existence in His many expansions. This thought
is material in nature. We have experience in the material world that a thing,
when  fragmentally  distributed,  loses  its  own  original  identity.  But  the
Mäyävädé  philosophers  fail  to  understand  that  absolute  means  that  one  plus
one  is  equal  to  one,  and  that  one  minus  one  is  also  equal  to  one.  This  is  the
case in the absolute world.

For  want  of  sufficient  knowledge  in  the  absolute  science,  we  are  now
covered with illusion, and therefore we think that we are separate from Kåñëa.
Although  we  are  separated  parts  of  Kåñëa,  we  are  nevertheless  not  different
from  Him.  The  bodily  difference  of  the  living  entities  is  mäyä,  or  not  actual
fact. We are all meant to satisfy Kåñëa. By mäyä alone Arjuna thought that the
temporary bodily relationship with his kinsmen was more important than his
eternal  spiritual  relationship  with  Kåñëa.  The  whole  teaching  of  the  Gétä  is
targeted  toward  this  end:  that  a  living  being,  as  Kåñëa’s  eternal  servitor,
cannot be separated from Kåñëa, and his sense of being an identity apart from
Kåñëa  is  called  mäyä.  The  living  entities,  as  separate  parts  and  parcels  of  the
Supreme,  have  a  purpose  to  fulfill.  Having  forgotten  that  purpose  since  time
immemorial, they are situated in different bodies, as men, animals, demigods,
etc.  Such  bodily  differences  arise  from  forgetfulness  of  the  transcendental
service  of  the  Lord.  But  when  one  is  engaged  in  transcendental  service
through Kåñëa consciousness, one becomes at once liberated from this illusion.
One can acquire such pure knowledge only from the bona fide spiritual master
and thereby avoid the delusion that the living entity is equal to Kåñëa. Perfect
knowledge is that the Supreme Soul, Kåñëa, is the supreme shelter for all living
entities,  and  giving  up  such  shelter,  the  living  entities  are  deluded  by  the
material energy, imagining themselves to have a separate identity. Thus, under
different  standards  of  material  identity,  they  become  forgetful  of  Kåñëa.
When,  however,  such  deluded  living  entities  become  situated  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, it is to be understood that they are on the path of liberation, as
confirmed  in  the  Bhägavatam  (2.10.6):  muktir  hitvänyathä-rüpaà  svarüpeëa
vyavasthitiù. Liberation means to be situated in one’s constitutional position as
an eternal servitor of Kåñëa (Kåñëa consciousness).

TEXT  36

AiPa cediSa PaaPae>Ya" SaveR>Ya" PaaPak*-taMa" )

Sav| jaNaâveNaEv v*iJaNa& SaNTairZYaiSa )) 36 ))

api ced asi päpebhyaù

sarvebhyaù päpa-kåt-tamaù
sarvaà jïäna-plavenaiva
våjinaà santariñyasi

SYNONYMS

api—even; cet—if; asi—you are; päpebhyaù—of sinners; sarvebhyaù—of all;
päpa-kåt-tamaù—the greatest sinner; sarvam—all such sinful reactions;
jïäna-plavena—by the boat of transcendental knowledge; eva—certainly;
våjinam—the ocean of miseries; santariñyasi—you will cross completely.

TRANSLATION

Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when you are
situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge you will be able to cross over
the ocean of miseries.

PURPORT

Proper  understanding  of  one’s  constitutional  position  in  relationship  to
Kåñëa  is  so  nice  that  it  can  at  once  lift  one  from  the  struggle  for  existence
which  goes  on  in  the  ocean  of  nescience.  This  material  world  is  sometimes
regarded  as  an  ocean  of  nescience  and  sometimes  as  a  blazing  forest.  In  the
ocean, however expert a swimmer one may be, the struggle for existence is very
severe.  If  someone  comes  forward  and  lifts  the  struggling  swimmer  from  the
ocean, he is the greatest savior. Perfect knowledge, received from the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  is  the  path  of  liberation.  The  boat  of  Kåñëa
consciousness is very simple, but at the same time the most sublime.

TEXT  37

YaQaEDaa&iSa SaiMaÖae_iGan>aRSMaSaaTku-åTae_JauRNa )

jaNaaiGan" SavRk-MaaRi<a >aSMaSaaTku-åTae TaQaa )) 37 ))

yathaidhäàsi samiddho ’gnir
bhasma-sät kurute ’rjuna
jïänägniù sarva-karmäëi
bhasma-sät kurute tathä

SYNONYMS

yathä—just as; edhäàsi—firewood; samiddhaù—blazing; agniù—fire;
bhasma-sät—ashes; kurute—turns; arjuna—O Arjuna; jïäna-agniù—the fire
of knowledge; sarva-karmäëi—all reactions to material activities;
bhasma-sät—to ashes; kurute—it turns; tathä—similarly.

TRANSLATION

As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire of

knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.

PURPORT

Perfect  knowledge  of  self  and  Superself  and  of  their  relationship  is
compared  herein  to  fire.  This  fire  not  only  burns  up  all  reactions  to  impious
activities,  but  also  all  reactions  to  pious  activities,  turning  them  to  ashes.
There  are  many  stages  of  reaction:  reaction  in  the  making,  reaction
fructifying, reaction already achieved, and reaction a priori. But knowledge of
the  constitutional  position  of  the  living  entity  burns  everything  to  ashes.
When  one  is  in  complete  knowledge,  all  reactions,  both  a  priori  and  a
posteriori,  are  consumed.  In  the  Vedas  (Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad  4.4.22)  it  is
stated, ubhe uhaivaiña ete taraty amåtaù sädhv-asädhüné: “One overcomes both
the pious and impious reactions of work.”

TEXT  38

Na ih jaNaeNa Sad*Xa& Paiv}aiMah ivÛTae )

TaTSvYa& YaaeGaSa&iSaÖ" k-ale/NaaTMaiNa ivNdiTa )) 38 ))

na hi jïänena sadåçaà
pavitram iha vidyate
tat svayaà yoga-saàsiddhaù
kälenätmani vindati

SYNONYMS

na—nothing; hi—certainly; jïänena—with knowledge; sadåçam—in
comparison; pavitram—sanctified; iha—in this world; vidyate—exists;
tat—that; svayam—himself; yoga—in devotion; saàsiddhaù—he who is
mature; kälena—in course of time; ätmani—in himself; vindati—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

In this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental

knowledge. Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And one who
has become accomplished in the practice of devotional service enjoys this
knowledge within himself in due course of time.

PURPORT

When we speak of transcendental knowledge, we do so in terms of spiritual
understanding.  As  such,  there 
is  nothing  so  sublime  and  pure  as
transcendental  knowledge.  Ignorance  is  the  cause  of  our  bondage,  and
knowledge is the cause of our liberation. This knowledge is the mature fruit of
devotional service, and when one is situated in transcendental knowledge, he
need  not  search  for  peace  elsewhere,  for  he  enjoys  peace  within  himself.  In
other words, this knowledge and peace culminate in Kåñëa consciousness. That
is the last word in the Bhagavad-gétä.

TEXT  39

é[Öavamç>aTae jaNa& TaTPar" Sa&YaTaeiNd]Ya" )

jaNa& l/Bßa Para& XaaiNTaMaicre<aaiDaGaC^iTa )) 39 ))

çraddhäväl labhate jïänaà
tat-paraù saàyatendriyaù
jïänaà labdhvä paräà çäntim
acireëädhigacchati

SYNONYMS

çraddhä-vän—a faithful man; labhate—achieves; jïänam—knowledge;
tat-paraù—very much attached to it; saàyata—controlled; indriyaù—senses;
jïänam—knowledge; labdhvä—having achieved; paräm—transcendental;
çäntim—peace; acireëa—very soon; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

A faithful man who is dedicated to transcendental knowledge and who

subdues his senses is eligible to achieve such knowledge, and having achieved it
he quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace.

PURPORT

Such  knowledge  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  can  be  achieved  by  a  faithful
person who believes firmly in Kåñëa. One is called a faithful man who thinks
that  simply  by  acting  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  he  can  attain  the  highest
perfection. This faith is attained by the discharge of devotional service, and by
chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare
Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, which cleanses one’s heart of all material dirt.
Over and above this, one should control the senses. A person who is faithful to
Kåñëa  and  who  controls  the  senses  can  easily  attain  perfection  in  the
knowledge of Kåñëa consciousness without delay.

TEXT  40

Ajêaé[ÕDaaNaê Sa&XaYaaTMaa ivNaXYaiTa )

NaaYa& l/aek-ae_iSTa Na Parae Na Sau%& Sa&XaYaaTMaNa" )) 40 ))

ajïaç cäçraddadhänaç ca
saàçayätmä vinaçyati
näyaà loko ’sti na paro
na sukhaà saàçayätmanaù

SYNONYMS

ajïaù—a fool who has no knowledge in standard scriptures; ca—and;
açraddadhänaù—without faith in revealed scriptures; ca—also; saàçaya—of
doubts; ätmä—a person; vinaçyati—falls back; na—never; ayam—in this;
lokaù—world; asti—there is; na—nor; paraù—in the next life; na—not;
sukham—happiness; saàçaya—doubtful; ätmanaù—of the person.

TRANSLATION

But ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the revealed scriptures do not

attain God consciousness; they fall down. For the doubting soul there is
happiness neither in this world nor in the next.

PURPORT

Out  of  many  standard  and  authoritative  revealed  scriptures,  the
Bhagavad-gétä is the best. Persons who are almost like animals have no faith in,
or knowledge of, the standard revealed scriptures; and some, even though they
have  knowledge  of,  or  can  cite  passages  from,  the  revealed  scriptures,  have
actually  no  faith  in  these  words.  And  even  though  others  may  have  faith  in
scriptures like Bhagavad-gétä, they do not believe in or worship the Personality
of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa.  Such  persons  cannot  have  any  standing  in  Kåñëa
consciousness. They fall down. Out of all the above-mentioned persons, those
who  have  no  faith  and  are  always  doubtful  make  no  progress  at  all.  Men

without faith in God and His revealed word find no good in this world, nor in
the  next.  For  them  there  is  no  happiness  whatsoever.  One  should  therefore
follow the principles of revealed scriptures with faith and thereby be raised to
the  platform  of  knowledge.  Only  this  knowledge  will  help  one  become
promoted  to  the  transcendental  platform  of  spiritual understanding. In other
words,  doubtful  persons  have  no  status  whatsoever  in  spiritual  emancipation.
One  should  therefore  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  great  äcäryas  who  are  in  the
disciplic succession and thereby attain success.

TEXT  41

YaaeGaSaNNYaSTak-MaaR<a& jaNaSaiH^àSa&XaYaMa( )

AaTMavNTa& Na k-MaaRi<a iNabDaniNTa DaNaÅYa )) 41 ))

yoga-sannyasta-karmäëaà
jïäna-saïchinna-saàçayam
ätmavantaà na karmäëi
nibadhnanti dhanaïjaya

SYNONYMS

yoga—by devotional service in karma-yoga; sannyasta—one who has
renounced; karmäëam—the fruits of actions; jïäna—by knowledge;
saïchinna—cut; saàçayam—doubts; ätma-vantam—situated in the self;
na—never; karmäëi—works; nibadhnanti—do bind; dhanaïjaya—O
conqueror of riches.

TRANSLATION

One who acts in devotional service, renouncing the fruits of his actions, and

whose doubts have been destroyed by transcendental knowledge, is situated
factually in the self. Thus he is not bound by the reactions of work, O
conqueror of riches.

PURPORT

One who follows the instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä, as it is imparted by
the Lord, the Personality of Godhead Himself, becomes free from all doubts by
the grace of transcendental knowledge. He, as a part and parcel of the Lord, in
full Kåñëa consciousness, is already established in self-knowledge. As such, he
is undoubtedly above bondage to action.

TEXT  42

TaSMaadjaNaSaM>aUTa& ôTSQa& jaNaaiSaNaaTMaNa" )

i^tvENa& Sa&XaYa& YaaeGaMaaiTaïaeitaï >aarTa )) 42 ))

tasmäd ajïäna-sambhütaà
håt-sthaà jïänäsinätmanaù
chittvainaà saàçayaà yogam
ätiñöhottiñöha bhärata

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; ajïäna-sambhütam—born of ignorance;
håt-stham—situated in the heart; jïäna—of knowledge; asinä—by the weapon;
ätmanaù—of the self; chittvä—cutting off; enam—this; saàçayam—doubt;
yogam—in yoga; ätiñöha—be situated; uttiñöha—stand up to fight; bhärata—O
descendant of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Therefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance
should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, O Bhärata,
stand and fight.

PURPORT

The  yoga  system  instructed  in  this  chapter  is  called  sanätana-yoga,  or
eternal activities performed by the living entity. This yoga has two divisions of
sacrificial actions: one is called sacrifice of one’s material possessions, and the
other is called knowledge of self, which is pure spiritual activity. If sacrifice of
one’s material possessions is not dovetailed for spiritual realization, then such
sacrifice  becomes  material.  But  one  who  performs  such  sacrifices  with  a
spiritual objective, or in devotional service, makes a perfect sacrifice. When we
come  to  spiritual  activities,  we  find  that  these  are  also  divided  into  two:
namely, understanding of one’s own self (or one’s constitutional position), and
the truth regarding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who follows the
path of Bhagavad-gétä as it is can very easily understand these two important
divisions  of  spiritual  knowledge.  For  him  there  is  no  difficulty  in  obtaining
perfect  knowledge  of  the  self  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  Lord.  And  such
understanding  is  beneficial,  for  such  a  person  can  easily  understand  the
transcendental  activities  of  the  Lord.  In  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  the
transcendental  activities  of  the  Lord  were  discussed  by  the  Supreme  Lord
Himself. One who does not understand the instructions of the Gétä is faithless,
and is to be considered to be misusing the fragmental independence awarded
to him by the Lord. In spite of such instructions, one who does not understand
the real nature of the Lord as the eternal, blissful, all-knowing Personality of
Godhead  is  certainly  fool  number  one.  Ignorance  can  be  removed  by  gradual
acceptance  of  the  principles  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Kåñëa  consciousness  is
awakened  by  different  types  of  sacrifices  to  the  demigods,  sacrifice  to
Brahman, sacrifice in celibacy, in household life, in controlling the senses, in
practicing  mystic  yoga,  in  penance,  in  forgoing  material  possessions,  in
studying  the  Vedas,  and  in  partaking  of  the  social  institution  called
varëäçrama-dharma.  All  of  these  are  known  as  sacrifice,  and  all  of  them  are
based on regulated action. But within all these activities, the important factor
is  self-realization.  One  who  seeks  that  objective  is  the  real  student  of
Bhagavad-gétä,  but  one  who  doubts  the  authority  of  Kåñëa  falls  back.  One  is
therefore advised to study Bhagavad-gétä, or any other scripture, under a bona
fide spiritual master, with service and surrender. A bona fide spiritual master is
in  the  disciplic  succession  from  time  eternal,  and  he  does  not  deviate  at  all

from  the  instructions  of  the  Supreme  Lord  as they were imparted millions of
years  ago  to  the  sun-god,  from  whom  the  instructions  of  Bhagavad-gétä  have
come down to the earthly kingdom. One should, therefore, follow the path of
Bhagavad-gétä as it is expressed in the Gétä itself and beware of self-interested
people after personal aggrandizement who deviate others from the actual path.
is  definitely  the  supreme  person,  and  His  activities  are
The  Lord 
transcendental. One who understands this is a liberated person from the very
beginning of his study of Bhagavad-gétä.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Transcendental Knowledge.

- CHAPTER 5 -
Karma-yoga—Action in Kåñëa Consciousness

TEXT  1

AJauRNa ovac

SaNNYaaSa& k-MaR<aa& k*-Z<a PauNaYaaeRGa& c Xa&SaiSa )

YaC^\eYa WTaYaaerek&- TaNMae b]Uih SauiNaiêTaMa( )) 1 ))

arjuna uväca
sannyäsaà karmaëäà kåñëa
punar yogaà ca çaàsasi
yac chreya etayor ekaà
tan me brühi su-niçcitam

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; sannyäsam—renunciation; karmaëäm—of all
activities; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; punaù—again; yogam—devotional service;
ca—also; çaàsasi—You are praising; yat—which; çreyaù—is more beneficial;
etayoù—of these two; ekam—one; tat—that; me—unto me; brühi—please tell;
su-niçcitam—definitely.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Kåñëa, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and then

again You recommend work with devotion. Now will You kindly tell me
definitely which of the two is more beneficial?

PURPORT

In  this  Fifth  Chapter  of  the  Bhagavad-gétä,  the  Lord  says  that  work  in
devotional service is better than dry mental speculation. Devotional service is
easier  than  the  latter  because,  being  transcendental  in  nature,  it  frees  one
from reaction. In the Second Chapter, preliminary knowledge of the soul and
its entanglement in the material body were explained. How to get out of this
material encagement by buddhi-yoga, or devotional service, was also explained
therein. In the Third Chapter, it was explained that a person who is situated
on the platform of knowledge no longer has any duties to perform. And in the
Fourth  Chapter  the  Lord  told  Arjuna  that  all  kinds  of  sacrificial  work
culminate in knowledge. However, at the end of the Fourth Chapter, the Lord
advised  Arjuna  to  wake  up  and  fight,  being  situated  in  perfect  knowledge.
Therefore,  by  simultaneously  stressing  the  importance  of  both  work  in
devotion  and  inaction  in  knowledge,  Kåñëa  has  perplexed  Arjuna  and
confused  his  determination.  Arjuna  understands  that  renunciation  in
knowledge involves cessation of all kinds of work performed as sense activities.
But if one performs work in devotional service, then how is work stopped? In
other words, he thinks that sannyäsa, or renunciation in knowledge, should be

altogether  free  from  all  kinds  of  activity,  because  work  and  renunciation
appear  to  him  to  be  incompatible.  He  appears  not  to  have  understood  that
work  in  full  knowledge  is  nonreactive  and  is  therefore  the  same  as  inaction.
He inquires, therefore, whether he should cease work altogether or work with
full knowledge.

TEXT  2

é[q>aGavaNauvac

SaNNYaaSa" k-MaRYaaeGaê iNa"é[eYaSak-ravu>aaE )

TaYaaeSTau k-MaRSaNNYaaSaaTk-MaRYaaeGaae iviXaZYaTae )) 2 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
sannyäsaù karma-yogaç ca
niùçreyasa-karäv ubhau
tayos tu karma-sannyäsät
karma-yogo viçiñyate

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said;
sannyäsaù—renunciation of work; karma-yogaù—work in devotion; ca—also;
niùçreyasa-karau—leading to the path of liberation; ubhau—both; tayoù—of
the two; tu—but; karma-sannyäsät—in comparison to the renunciation of
fruitive work; karma-yogaù—work in devotion; viçiñyate—is better.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead replied: The renunciation of work and work in

devotion are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotional
service is better than renunciation of work.

PURPORT

Fruitive  activities  (seeking  sense  gratification)  are  cause  for  material
bondage.  As  long  as  one  is  engaged  in  activities  aimed  at  improving  the
standard  of  bodily  comfort,  one  is  sure  to  transmigrate  to  different  types  of
bodies,  thereby  continuing  material  bondage  perpetually. Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(5.5.4–6) confirms this as follows:

nünaà pramattaù kurute vikarma
yad indriya-prétaya äpåëoti
na sädhu manye yata ätmano ’yam
asann api kleça-da äsa dehaù

paräbhavas tävad abodha-jäto
yävan na jijïäsata ätma-tattvam
yävat kriyäs tävad idaà mano vai
karmätmakaà yena çaréra-bandhaù

evaà manaù karma-vaçaà prayuìkte
avidyayätmany upadhéyamäne
prétir na yävan mayi väsudeve
na mucyate deha-yogena tävat

“People  are  mad  after  sense  gratification,  and  they  do  not  know  that  this
present body, which is full of miseries, is a result of one’s fruitive activities in
the  past.  Although  this  body  is  temporary,  it  is  always  giving  one  trouble  in
many  ways.  Therefore,  to  act  for  sense  gratification  is  not  good.  One  is
considered to be a failure in life as long as he makes no inquiry about his real
identity.  As  long  as  he  does  not  know  his  real  identity,  he  has  to  work  for
fruitive  results  for  sense  gratification,  and  as  long  as  one  is  engrossed  in  the
consciousness of sense gratification one has to transmigrate from one body to
another.  Although  the  mind  may  be  engrossed  in  fruitive  activities  and
influenced  by  ignorance,  one  must  develop  a  love  for  devotional  service  to
Väsudeva. Only then can one have the opportunity to get out of the bondage
of material existence.”

Therefore, jïäna (or knowledge that one is not this material body but spirit
soul) is not sufficient for liberation. One has to act in the status of spirit soul,

otherwise  there  is  no  escape  from  material  bondage.  Action  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  not,  however,  action  on  the  fruitive  platform.  Activities
performed in full knowledge strengthen one’s advancement in real knowledge.
Without Kåñëa consciousness, mere renunciation of fruitive activities does not
actually  purify  the  heart  of  a  conditioned  soul.  As  long  as  the  heart  is  not
purified,  one  has  to  work  on  the  fruitive  platform.  But  action  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  automatically  helps  one  escape  the  result  of  fruitive  action  so
that one need not descend to the material platform. Therefore action in Kåñëa
consciousness is always superior to renunciation, which always entails a risk of
falling.  Renunciation  without  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  incomplete,  as  is
confirmed by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.258):

präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo
vairägyaà phalgu kathyate

“When  persons  eager  to  achieve  liberation  renounce  things  related  to  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  thinking  them  to  be  material,  their
renunciation is called incomplete.” Renunciation is complete when it is in the
knowledge  that  everything  in  existence  belongs  to  the  Lord  and  that  no  one
should  claim  proprietorship  over  anything.  One  should  understand  that,
factually,  nothing  belongs  to  anyone.  Then  where  is  the  question  of
renunciation?  One  who  knows  that  everything  is  Kåñëa’s  property  is  always
situated in renunciation. Since everything belongs to Kåñëa, everything should
be  employed  in  the  service  of  Kåñëa.  This  perfect  form  of  action  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  far  better  than  any  amount  of  artificial  renunciation  by  a
sannyäsé of the Mäyävädé school.

TEXT  3

jeYa" Sa iNaTYaSaNNYaaSaq Yaae Na Üeií Na k-ax(+aiTa )

iNaÜRNÜae ih Mahabahae Sau%& bNDaaTPa[MauCYaTae )) 3 ))

jïeyaù sa nitya-sannyäsé
yo na dveñöi na käìkñati
nirdvandvo hi mahä-bäho
sukhaà bandhät pramucyate

SYNONYMS

jïeyaù—should be known; saù—he; nitya—always; sannyäsé—renouncer;
yaù—who; na—never; dveñöi—abhors; na—nor; käìkñati—desires;
nirdvandvaù—free from all dualities; hi—certainly; mahä-bäho—O
mighty-armed one; sukham—happily; bandhät—from bondage; pramucyate—is
completely liberated.

TRANSLATION

One who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known to be

always renounced. Such a person, free from all dualities, easily overcomes
material bondage and is completely liberated, O mighty-armed Arjuna.

PURPORT

One who is fully in Kåñëa consciousness is always a renouncer because he
feels neither hatred nor desire for the results of his actions. Such a renouncer,
dedicated to the transcendental loving service of the Lord, is fully qualified in
knowledge  because  he  knows  his  constitutional  position  in  his  relationship
with Kåñëa. He knows fully well that Kåñëa is the whole and that he is part and
parcel  of  Kåñëa.  Such  knowledge  is  perfect  because  it  is  qualitatively  and
quantitatively correct. The concept of oneness with Kåñëa is incorrect because
the  part  cannot  be  equal  to  the  whole.  Knowledge  that  one  is  one  in  quality
yet  different  in  quantity  is  correct  transcendental  knowledge  leading  one  to
become full in himself, having nothing to aspire to or lament over. There is no
duality  in  his  mind  because  whatever  he  does,  he  does  for  Kåñëa.  Being  thus
freed  from  the  platform  of  dualities,  he  is  liberated—even  in  this  material
world.

TEXT  4

Saa&:YaYaaeGaaE Pa*QaGbal/a" Pa[vdiNTa Na Pai<@Taa" )

Wk-MaPYaaiSQaTa" SaMYaGau>aYaaeivRNdTae f-l/Ma( )) 4 ))

säìkhya-yogau påthag bäläù
pravadanti na paëòitäù
ekam apy ästhitaù samyag
ubhayor vindate phalam

SYNONYMS

säìkhya—analytical study of the material world; yogau—work in devotional
service; påthak—different; bäläù—the less intelligent; pravadanti—say;
na—never; paëòitäù—the learned; ekam—in one; api—even; ästhitaù—being
situated; samyak—complete; ubhayoù—of both; vindate—enjoys; phalam—the
result.

TRANSLATION

Only the ignorant speak of devotional service [karma-yoga] as being different

from the analytical study of the material world [Säìkhya]. Those who are
actually learned say that he who applies himself well to one of these paths
achieves the results of both.

PURPORT

The aim of the analytical study of the material world is to find the soul of
existence.  The  soul  of  the  material  world  is  Viñëu,  or  the  Supersoul.
Devotional service to the Lord entails service to the Supersoul. One process is
to find the root of the tree, and the other is to water the root. The real student
of Säìkhya philosophy finds the root of the material world, Viñëu, and then,
in perfect knowledge, engages himself in the service of the Lord. Therefore, in

essence,  there  is  no  difference  between  the  two  because  the  aim  of  both  is
Viñëu.  Those  who  do  not  know  the  ultimate  end  say  that  the  purposes  of
Säìkhya and karma-yoga are not the same, but one who is learned knows the
unifying aim in these different processes.

TEXT  5

YaTSaa&:YaE" Pa[aPYaTae SQaaNa& TaÛaeGaEriPa GaMYaTae )

Wk&- Saa&:Ya& c YaaeGa& c Ya" PaXYaiTa Sa PaXYaiTa )) 5 ))

yat säìkhyaiù präpyate sthänaà
tad yogair api gamyate
ekaà säìkhyaà ca yogaà ca
yaù paçyati sa paçyati

SYNONYMS

yat—what; säìkhyaiù—by means of Säìkhya philosophy; präpyate—is
achieved; sthänam—place; tat—that; yogaiù—by devotional service; api—also;
gamyate—one can attain; ekam—one; säìkhyam—analytical study; ca—and;
yogam—action in devotion; ca—and; yaù—one who; paçyati—sees; saù—he;
paçyati—actually sees.

TRANSLATION

One who knows that the position reached by means of analytical study can
also be attained by devotional service, and who therefore sees analytical study
and devotional service to be on the same level, sees things as they are.

PURPORT

The  real  purpose  of  philosophical  research  is  to  find  the  ultimate  goal  of
life.  Since  the  ultimate  goal  of  life  is  self-realization,  there  is  no  difference
between  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  two  processes.  By  Säìkhya

philosophical research one comes to the conclusion that a living entity is not a
part  and  parcel  of  the  material  world  but  of  the  supreme  spirit  whole.
Consequently,  the  spirit  soul  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  material  world;  his
actions  must  be  in  some  relation  with  the  Supreme.  When  he  acts  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, he is actually in his constitutional position. In the first process,
Säìkhya, one has to become detached from matter, and in the devotional yoga
process  one  has  to  attach  himself  to  the  work  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.
Factually,  both  processes  are  the  same,  although  superficially  one  process
appears  to  involve  detachment  and  the  other  process  appears  to  involve
attachment.  Detachment  from  matter  and  attachment  to  Kåñëa  are  one  and
the same. One who can see this sees things as they are.

TEXT  6

SaNNYaaSaSTau Mahabahae du"%MaaáuMaYaaeGaTa" )

YaaeGaYau¢-ae MauiNab]Rø Naicre<aaiDaGaC^iTa )) 6 ))

sannyäsas tu mahä-bäho
duùkham äptum ayogataù
yoga-yukto munir brahma
na cireëädhigacchati

SYNONYMS

sannyäsaù—the renounced order of life; tu—but; mahä-bäho—O
mighty-armed one; duùkham—distress; äptum—afflicts one with;
ayogataù—without devotional service; yoga-yuktaù—one engaged in
devotional service; muniù—a thinker; brahma—the Supreme; na
cireëa—without delay; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

Merely renouncing all activities yet not engaging in the devotional service of
the Lord cannot make one happy. But a thoughtful person engaged in devotional

service can achieve the Supreme without delay.

PURPORT

There are two classes of sannyäsés, or persons in the renounced order of life.
The  Mäyävädé  sannyäsés  are  engaged  in  the  study  of  Säìkhya  philosophy,
whereas  the  Vaiñëava  sannyäsés  are  engaged  in  the  study  of  Bhägavatam
philosophy, which affords the proper commentary on the Vedänta-sütras. The
Mäyävädé  sannyäsés  also  study  the  Vedänta-sütras,  but  use  their  own
commentary, called Çäréraka-bhäñya, written by Çaìkaräcärya. The students of
the  Bhägavata  school  are  engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord,
according  to  päïcarätriké  regulations,  and  therefore  the  Vaiñëava  sannyäsés
have  multiple  engagements  in  the  transcendental  service  of  the  Lord.  The
Vaiñëava  sannyäsés  have  nothing  to  do  with  material  activities,  and  yet  they
perform  various  activities  in  their  devotional  service  to  the  Lord.  But  the
Mäyävädé  sannyäsés,  engaged  in  the  studies  of  Säìkhya  and  Vedänta  and
speculation,  cannot  relish  the  transcendental  service  of  the  Lord.  Because
their  studies  become  very  tedious,  they  sometimes  become  tired  of  Brahman
speculation,  and  thus  they  take  shelter  of  the  Bhägavatam  without  proper
understanding.  Consequently  their  study  of  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  becomes
troublesome.  Dry  speculations  and  impersonal  interpretations  by  artificial
means are all useless for the Mäyävädé sannyäsés. The Vaiñëava sannyäsés, who
are  engaged  in  devotional  service,  are  happy  in  the  discharge  of  their
transcendental duties, and they have the guarantee of ultimate entrance into
the  kingdom  of  God.  The  Mäyävädé  sannyäsés  sometimes  fall  down  from  the
path  of  self-realization  and  again  enter  into  material  activities  of  a
philanthropic  and  altruistic  nature,  which  are  nothing  but  material
engagements.  Therefore,  the  conclusion  is  that  those  who  are  engaged  in
Kåñëa  conscious  activities  are  better  situated  than  the  sannyäsés  engaged  in
simple speculation about what is Brahman and what is not Brahman, although
they too come to Kåñëa consciousness, after many births.

TEXT  7

YaaeGaYau¢-ae ivéuÖaTMaa iviJaTaaTMaa iJaTaeiNd]Ya" )

SavR>aUTaaTMa>aUTaaTMaa ku-vRàiPa Na il/PYaTae )) 7 ))

yoga-yukto viçuddhätmä
vijitätmä jitendriyaù
sarva-bhütätma-bhütätmä
kurvann api na lipyate

SYNONYMS

yoga-yuktaù—engaged in devotional service; viçuddha-ätmä—a purified soul;
vijita-ätmä—self-controlled; jita-indriyaù—having conquered the senses;
sarva-bhüta—to all living entities; ätma-bhüta-ätmä—compassionate; kurvan
api—although engaged in work; na—never; lipyate—is entangled.

TRANSLATION

One who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls his mind

and senses is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him. Though always
working, such a man is never entangled.

PURPORT

One who is on the path of liberation by Kåñëa consciousness is very dear to
every  living  being,  and  every  living  being  is  dear  to  him.  This  is  due  to  his
Kåñëa  consciousness.  Such  a  person  cannot  think  of  any  living  being  as
separate from Kåñëa, just as the leaves and branches of a tree are not separate
from  the  tree.  He  knows  very  well  that  by  pouring  water  on  the  root  of  the
tree,  the  water  will  be  distributed  to  all  the  leaves  and  branches,  or  by
supplying  food  to  the  stomach,  the  energy  is  automatically  distributed
throughout the body. Because one who works in Kåñëa consciousness is servant
to  all,  he  is  very  dear  to  everyone.  And  because  everyone  is  satisfied  by  his
work,  he  is  pure  in  consciousness.  Because  he  is  pure  in  consciousness,  his

mind is completely controlled. And because his mind is controlled, his senses
are  also  controlled.  Because  his  mind  is  always  fixed  on  Kåñëa,  there  is  no
chance  of  his  being  deviated  from  Kåñëa.  Nor  is  there  a  chance  that  he  will
engage  his  senses  in  matters  other  than  the  service  of  the  Lord.  He  does  not
like  to  hear  anything  except  topics  relating  to  Kåñëa;  he  does  not  like  to  eat
anything which is not offered to Kåñëa; and he does not wish to go anywhere if
Kåñëa  is  not  involved.  Therefore,  his  senses  are  controlled.  A  man  of
controlled senses cannot be offensive to anyone. One may ask, “Why then was
Arjuna  offensive  (in  battle)  to  others?  Wasn’t  he  in  Kåñëa  consciousness?”
Arjuna was only superficially offensive because (as has already been explained
in  the  Second  Chapter)  all  the  assembled  persons  on  the  battlefield  would
continue to live individually, as the soul cannot be slain. So, spiritually, no one
was killed on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra. Only their dresses were changed by
the  order  of  Kåñëa,  who  was  personally  present.  Therefore  Arjuna,  while
fighting on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, was not really fighting at all; he was
simply  carrying  out  the  orders  of  Kåñëa  in  full  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Such  a
person is never entangled in the reactions of work.

TEXTS

 8–9

NaEv ik-iÄTk-raeMaqiTa Yau¢-ae MaNYaeTa TatvivTa( )

PaXYaHXa*<vNSPa*XaiÅga]àénNGaC^NSvPaNìSaNa( )) 8 ))

Pa[l/PaiNvSa*JaNGa*õàuiNMaziàiMazàiPa )

wiNd]Yaa<aqiNd]YaaQaeRzu vTaRNTa wiTa DaarYaNa( )) 9 ))

naiva kiïcit karométi
yukto manyeta tattva-vit
paçyaï çåëvan spåçaï jighrann
açnan gacchan svapan çvasan

pralapan visåjan gåhëann
unmiñan nimiñann api
indriyäëéndriyärtheñu

vartanta iti dhärayan

SYNONYMS

na—never; eva—certainly; kiïcit—anything; karomi—I do; iti—thus;
yuktaù—engaged in the divine consciousness; manyeta—thinks;
tattva-vit—one who knows the truth; paçyan—seeing; çåëvan—hearing;
spåçan—touching; jighran—smelling; açnan—eating; gacchan—going;
svapan—dreaming; çvasan—breathing; pralapan—talking; visåjan—giving up;
gåhëan—accepting; unmiñan—opening; nimiñan—closing; api—in spite of;
indriyäëi—the senses; indriya-artheñu—in sense gratification; vartante—let
them be so engaged; iti—thus; dhärayan—considering.

TRANSLATION

A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing, hearing,
touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping and breathing, always knows
within himself that he actually does nothing at all. Because while speaking,
evacuating, receiving, or opening or closing his eyes, he always knows that only
the material senses are engaged with their objects and that he is aloof from
them.

PURPORT

A person in Kåñëa consciousness is pure in his existence, and consequently
he has nothing to do with any work which depends upon five immediate and
remote  causes:  the  doer,  the  work,  the  situation,  the  endeavor  and  fortune.
This  is  because  he  is  engaged  in  the  loving  transcendental  service  of  Kåñëa.
Although  he  appears  to  be  acting  with  his  body  and  senses,  he  is  always
conscious  of  his  actual  position,  which  is  spiritual  engagement.  In  material
consciousness,  the  senses  are  engaged  in  sense  gratification,  but  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  the  senses  are  engaged  in  the  satisfaction  of  Kåñëa’s  senses.
Therefore, the Kåñëa conscious person is always free, even though he appears
to be engaged in affairs of the senses. Activities such as seeing and hearing are

actions  of  the  senses  meant  for  receiving  knowledge,  whereas  moving,
speaking, evacuating, etc., are actions of the senses meant for work. A Kåñëa
conscious  person  is  never  affected  by  the  actions  of  the  senses.  He  cannot
perform any act except in the service of the Lord because he knows that he is
the eternal servitor of the Lord.

TEXT  10

b]ø<YaaDaaYa k-MaaRi<a Sa®& TYa¤-a k-raeiTa Ya" )

il/PYaTae Na Sa PaaPaeNa PaÚPa}aiMavaM>aSaa )) 10 ))

brahmaëy ädhäya karmäëi
saìgaà tyaktvä karoti yaù
lipyate na sa päpena
padma-patram ivämbhasä

SYNONYMS

brahmaëi—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ädhäya—resigning;
karmäëi—all works; saìgam—attachment; tyaktvä—giving up;
karoti—performs; yaù—who; lipyate—is affected; na—never; saù—he;
päpena—by sin; padma-patram—a lotus leaf; iva—like; ambhasä—by the
water.

TRANSLATION

One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results

unto the Supreme Lord, is unaffected by sinful action, as the lotus leaf is
untouched by water.

PURPORT

Here brahmaëi means in Kåñëa consciousness. The material world is a sum
total  manifestation  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  technically  called

the pradhäna. The Vedic hymns sarvaà hy etad brahma (Mäëòükya Upaniñad
2),  tasmäd  etad  brahma  näma-rüpam  annaà  ca  jäyate  (Muëòaka Upaniñad
1.2.10),  and,  in  the Bhagavad-gétä  (14.3),  mama  yonir  mahad  brahma  indicate
that  everything  in  the  material  world  is  a  manifestation  of  Brahman;  and
although the effects are differently manifested, they are nondifferent from the
cause.  In  the  Éçopaniñad  it  is  said  that  everything  is  related  to  the  Supreme
Brahman, or Kåñëa, and thus everything belongs to Him only. One who knows
perfectly  well  that  everything  belongs  to  Kåñëa,  that  He  is  the  proprietor  of
everything  and  that,  therefore,  everything  is  engaged  in  the  service  of  the
Lord,  naturally  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  results  of  his  activities,  whether
virtuous  or  sinful.  Even  one’s  material  body,  being  a  gift  of  the  Lord  for
carrying  out  a  particular  type  of  action,  can  be  engaged  in  Kåñëa
consciousness. It is then beyond contamination by sinful reactions, exactly as
the lotus leaf, though remaining in the water, is not wet. The Lord also says in
the Gétä  (3.30),  mayi  sarväëi  karmäëi  sannyasya:  “Resign  all  works  unto  Me
[Kåñëa].”  The  conclusion  is  that  a  person  without  Kåñëa  consciousness  acts
according  to  the  concept  of  the  material  body  and  senses,  but  a  person  in
Kåñëa  consciousness  acts  according  to  the  knowledge  that  the  body  is  the
property of Kåñëa and should therefore be engaged in the service of Kåñëa.

TEXT  11

k-aYaeNa MaNaSaa buÖya ke-vlE/iriNd]YaEriPa )

YaaeiGaNa" k-MaR ku-vRiNTa Sa®& TYa¤-aTMaéuÖYae )) 11 ))

käyena manasä buddhyä
kevalair indriyair api
yoginaù karma kurvanti
saìgaà tyaktvätma-çuddhaye

SYNONYMS

käyena—with the body; manasä—with the mind; buddhyä—with the

intelligence; kevalaiù—purified; indriyaiù—with the senses; api—even;
yoginaù—Kåñëa conscious persons; karma—actions; kurvanti—they perform;
saìgam—attachment; tyaktvä—giving up; ätma—of the self; çuddhaye—for
the purpose of purification.

TRANSLATION

The yogés, abandoning attachment, act with body, mind, intelligence and

even with the senses, only for the purpose of purification.

PURPORT

When one acts in Kåñëa consciousness for the satisfaction of the senses of
Kåñëa, any action, whether of the body, mind, intelligence or even the senses,
is  purified  of  material  contamination.  There  are  no  material  reactions
resulting  from  the  activities  of  a  Kåñëa  conscious  person.  Therefore  purified
activities,  which  are  generally  called  sad-äcära,  can  be  easily  performed  by
acting 
his
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.187) describes this as follows:

Çré  Rüpa  Gosvämé 

consciousness. 

in  Kåñëa 

in 

éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate

“A person acting in Kåñëa consciousness (or, in other words, in the service
of  Kåñëa)  with  his  body,  mind,  intelligence  and  words  is  a  liberated  person
even within the material world, although he may be engaged in many so-called
material activities.” He has no false ego, for he does not believe that he is this
material body, or that he possesses the body. He knows that he is not this body
and that this body does not belong to him. He himself belongs to Kåñëa, and
the  body  too  belongs  to  Kåñëa.  When  he  applies  everything  produced  of  the
body,  mind,  intelligence,  words,  life,  wealth,  etc.—whatever  he  may  have
within his possession—to Kåñëa’s service, he is at once dovetailed with Kåñëa.
He  is  one  with  Kåñëa  and  is  devoid  of the false ego that leads one to believe

that he is the body, etc. This is the perfect stage of Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  12

Yau¢-" k-MaRf-l&/ TYa¤-a XaaiNTaMaaPanaeiTa NaEiïk-IMa( )

AYau¢-" k-aMak-are<a f-le/ Sa¢-ae iNabDYaTae )) 12 ))

yuktaù karma-phalaà tyaktvä
çäntim äpnoti naiñöhikém
ayuktaù käma-käreëa
phale sakto nibadhyate

SYNONYMS

yuktaù—one who is engaged in devotional service; karma-phalam—the results
of all activities; tyaktvä—giving up; çäntim—perfect peace; äpnoti—achieves;
naiñöhikém—unflinching; ayuktaù—one who is not in Kåñëa consciousness;
käma-käreëa—for enjoying the result of work; phale—in the result;
saktaù—attached; nibadhyate—becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

The steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers the

result of all activities to Me; whereas a person who is not in union with the
Divine, who is greedy for the fruits of his labor, becomes entangled.

PURPORT

The  difference  between  a  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  a  person  in
bodily consciousness is that the former is attached to Kåñëa whereas the latter
is attached to the results of his activities. The person who is attached to Kåñëa
and works for Him only is certainly a liberated person, and he has no anxiety
over the results of his work. In the Bhägavatam, the cause of anxiety over the
result of an activity is explained as being one’s functioning in the conception

of  duality,  that  is,  without  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth.  Kåñëa  is  the
Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead. In Kåñëa consciousness,
there is no duality. All that exists is a product of Kåñëa’s energy, and Kåñëa is
all  good.  Therefore,  activities  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  are  on  the  absolute
plane;  they  are  transcendental  and  have  no  material  effect.  One  is  therefore
filled  with  peace  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  But  one  who  is  entangled  in  profit
calculation for sense gratification cannot have that peace. This is the secret of
Kåñëa  consciousness—realization  that  there  is  no  existence  besides  Kåñëa  is
the platform of peace and fearlessness.

TEXT  13

SavRk-MaaRi<a MaNaSaa SaNNYaSYaaSTae Sau%& vXaq )

NavÜare Paure dehq NaEv ku-vRà k-arYaNa( )) 13 ))

sarva-karmäëi manasä
sannyasyäste sukhaà vaçé
nava-dväre pure dehé
naiva kurvan na kärayan

SYNONYMS

sarva—all; karmäëi—activities; manasä—by the mind; sannyasya—giving up;
äste—remains; sukham—in happiness; vaçé—one who is controlled;
nava-dväre—in the place where there are nine gates; pure—in the city;
dehé—the embodied soul; na—never; eva—certainly; kurvan—doing anything;
na—not; kärayan—causing to be done.

TRANSLATION

When the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally renounces

all actions, he resides happily in the city of nine gates [the material body],
neither working nor causing work to be done.

PURPORT

The embodied soul lives in the city of nine gates. The activities of the body,
or  the  figurative  city  of  body,  are  conducted  automatically  by  its  particular
modes of nature. The soul, although subjecting himself to the conditions of the
body,  can  be  beyond  those  conditions,  if  he  so  desires.  Owing  only  to
forgetfulness of his superior nature, he identifies with the material body, and
therefore suffers. By Kåñëa consciousness, he can revive his real position and
thus  come  out  of  his  embodiment.  Therefore,  when  one  takes  to  Kåñëa
consciousness, one at once becomes completely aloof from bodily activities. In
such a controlled life, in which his deliberations are changed, he lives happily
within the city of nine gates. The nine gates are mentioned as follows:

nava-dväre pure dehé
haàso leläyate bahiù
vaçé sarvasya lokasya
sthävarasya carasya ca

“The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead, who is living within the body of a
living  entity,  is  the  controller  of  all  living  entities  all  over  the  universe.  The
body  consists  of  nine  gates  [two  eyes,  two  nostrils,  two  ears,  one  mouth,  the
anus  and  the  genitals].  The  living  entity  in  his  conditioned  stage  identifies
himself  with  the  body,  but  when  he  identifies  himself  with  the  Lord  within
himself,  he  becomes  just  as  free  as  the  Lord,  even  while  in  the  body.”
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 3.18)

Therefore, a Kåñëa conscious person is free from both the outer and inner

activities of the material body.

TEXT  14

Na k-Ta*RTv& Na k-MaaRi<a l/aek-SYa Sa*JaiTa Pa[>au" )

Na k-MaRf-l/Sa&YaaeGa& Sv>aavSTau Pa[vTaRTae )) 14 ))

na kartåtvaà na karmäëi
lokasya såjati prabhuù
na karma-phala-saàyogaà
svabhävas tu pravartate

SYNONYMS

na—never; kartåtvam—proprietorship; na—nor; karmäëi—activities;
lokasya—of the people; såjati—creates; prabhuù—the master of the city of the
body; na—nor; karma-phala—with the results of activities;
saàyogam—connection; svabhävaù—the modes of material nature; tu—but;
pravartate—act.

TRANSLATION

The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create activities,
nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create the fruits of action. All this
is enacted by the modes of material nature.

PURPORT

The living entity, as will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, is one of the
energies or natures of the Supreme Lord but is distinct from matter, which is
another  nature—called  inferior—of  the  Lord.  Somehow  the  superior  nature,
the  living  entity,  has  been  in  contact  with  material  nature  since  time
immemorial. The temporary body or material dwelling place which he obtains
is  the  cause  of  varieties  of  activities  and  their  resultant  reactions.  Living  in
such  a  conditional  atmosphere,  one  suffers  the  results  of  the  activities  of  the
body  by  identifying  himself  (in  ignorance)  with  the  body.  It  is  ignorance
acquired  from  time  immemorial  that  is  the  cause  of  bodily  suffering  and
distress.  As  soon  as  the  living  entity  becomes  aloof  from  the  activities  of  the
body, he becomes free from the reactions as well. As long as he is in the city of
body, he appears to be the master of it, but actually he is neither its proprietor
nor  controller  of  its  actions  and  reactions.  He  is  simply  in  the  midst  of  the

material  ocean,  struggling  for  existence.  The  waves  of  the  ocean  are  tossing
him,  and  he  has  no  control  over  them.  His  best  solution  is  to  get  out  of  the
water  by  transcendental  Kåñëa  consciousness.  That  alone  will  save  him  from
all turmoil.

TEXT  15

Naadtae k-SYaicTPaaPa& Na cEv Sauk*-Ta& iv>au" )

AjaNaeNaav*Ta& jaNa& TaeNa MauùiNTa JaNTav" )) 15 ))

nädatte kasyacit päpaà
na caiva sukåtaà vibhuù
ajïänenävåtaà jïänaà
tena muhyanti jantavaù

SYNONYMS

na—never; ädatte—accepts; kasyacit—anyone’s; päpam—sin; na—nor;
ca—also; eva—certainly; su-kåtam—pious activities; vibhuù—the Supreme
Lord; ajïänena—by ignorance; ävåtam—covered; jïänam—knowledge;
tena—by that; muhyanti—are bewildered; jantavaù—the living entities.

TRANSLATION

Nor does the Supreme Lord assume anyone’s sinful or pious activities.
Embodied beings, however, are bewildered because of the ignorance which
covers their real knowledge.

PURPORT

The Sanskrit word vibhu means the Supreme Lord who is full of unlimited
knowledge,  riches,  strength,  fame,  beauty  and  renunciation.  He  is  always
satisfied  in  Himself,  undisturbed  by  sinful  or  pious  activities.  He  does  not
create  a  particular  situation  for  any  living  entity,  but  the  living  entity,

bewildered by ignorance, desires to be put into certain conditions of life, and
thereby his chain of action and reaction begins. A living entity is, by superior
nature,  full  of  knowledge.  Nevertheless,  he  is  prone  to  be  influenced  by
ignorance  due  to  his  limited  power.  The  Lord  is  omnipotent,  but  the  living
entity is not. The Lord is vibhu, or omniscient, but the living entity is aëu, or
atomic. Because he is a living soul, he has the capacity to desire by his free will.
Such desire is fulfilled only by the omnipotent Lord. And so, when the living
entity is bewildered in his desires, the Lord allows him to fulfill those desires,
but the Lord is never responsible for the actions and reactions of the particular
situation which may be desired. Being in a bewildered condition, therefore, the
embodied  soul  identifies  himself  with  the  circumstantial  material  body  and
becomes subjected to the temporary misery and happiness of life. The Lord is
the  constant  companion  of  the  living  entity  as  Paramätmä,  or  the  Supersoul,
and therefore He can understand the desires of the individual soul, as one can
smell  the  flavor  of  a  flower  by  being  near  it.  Desire  is  a  subtle  form  of
conditioning  for  the  living  entity.  The  Lord  fulfills  his  desire  as  he  deserves:
Man proposes and God disposes. The individual is not, therefore, omnipotent
in fulfilling his desires. The Lord, however, can fulfill all desires, and the Lord,
being  neutral  to  everyone,  does  not  interfere  with  the  desires  of  the  minute
independent living entities. However, when one desires Kåñëa, the Lord takes
special care and encourages one to desire in such a way that one can attain to
Him and be eternally happy. The Vedic hymns therefore declare, eña u hy eva
sädhu karma kärayati taà yam ebhyo lokebhya unninéñate. eña u eväsädhu karma
kärayati  yam  adho  ninéñate:  “The  Lord  engages  the  living  entity  in  pious
activities  so  that  he  may  be  elevated.  The  Lord  engages  him  in  impious
activities so that he may go to hell.” (Kauñétaké Upaniñad 3.8)

ajïo jantur anéço ’yam
ätmanaù sukha-duùkhayoù
éçvara-prerito gacchet
svargaà väçv abhram eva ca

“The living entity is completely dependent in his distress and happiness. By
the will of the Supreme he can go to heaven or hell, as a cloud is driven by the

air.”

Therefore  the  embodied  soul,  by  his  immemorial  desire  to  avoid  Kåñëa
consciousness,  causes  his  own  bewilderment.  Consequently,  although  he  is
constitutionally  eternal,  blissful  and  cognizant,  due  to  the  littleness  of  his
existence  he  forgets  his  constitutional  position  of  service  to  the  Lord  and  is
thus  entrapped  by  nescience.  And,  under  the  spell  of  ignorance,  the  living
entity  claims  that  the  Lord  is  responsible  for  his  conditional  existence.  The
Vedänta-sütras  (2.1.34)  also  confirm  this.  Vaiñamya-nairghåëye  na  säpekñatvät
tathä  hi  darçayati:  “The  Lord  neither  hates  nor  likes  anyone,  though  He
appears to.”

TEXT  16

jaNaeNa Tau TadjaNa& Yaeza& NaaiXaTaMaaTMaNa" )

TaezaMaaidTYavJjaNa& Pa[k-aXaYaiTa TaTParMa( )) 16 ))

jïänena tu tad ajïänaà
yeñäà näçitam ätmanaù
teñäm äditya-vaj jïänaà
prakäçayati tat param

SYNONYMS

jïänena—by knowledge; tu—but; tat—that; ajïänam—nescience;
yeñäm—whose; näçitam—is destroyed; ätmanaù—of the living entity;
teñäm—their; äditya-vat—like the rising sun; jïänam—knowledge;
prakäçayati—discloses; tat param—Kåñëa consciousness.

TRANSLATION

When, however, one is enlightened with the knowledge by which nescience

is destroyed, then his knowledge reveals everything, as the sun lights up
everything in the daytime.

PURPORT

Those  who  have  forgotten  Kåñëa  must  certainly  be  bewildered,  but  those
who  are  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  are  not  bewildered  at  all.  It  is  stated  in  the
Bhagavad-gétä,  sarvaà  jïäna-plavena,  jïänägniù  sarva-karmäëi  and  na  hi
jïänena  sadåçam.  Knowledge  is  always  highly  esteemed.  And  what  is  that
knowledge? Perfect knowledge is achieved when one surrenders unto Kåñëa, as
is said in the Seventh Chapter, 19th verse: bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän
mäà prapadyate. After passing through many, many births, when one perfect
in knowledge surrenders unto Kåñëa, or when one attains Kåñëa consciousness,
then everything is revealed to him, as everything is revealed by the sun in the
daytime. The living entity is bewildered in so many ways. For instance, when
he unceremoniously thinks himself God, he actually falls into the last snare of
nescience.  If  a  living  entity  is  God,  then  how  can  he  become  bewildered  by
nescience?  Does  God  become  bewildered  by  nescience?  If  so,  then  nescience,
or Satan, is greater than God. Real knowledge can be obtained from a person
who  is  in  perfect  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Therefore,  one  has  to  seek  out  such  a
bona fide spiritual master and, under him, learn what Kåñëa consciousness is,
for  Kåñëa  consciousness  will  certainly  drive  away  all  nescience,  as  the  sun
drives away darkness. Even though a person may be in full knowledge that he
is not this body but is transcendental to the body, he still may not be able to
discriminate  between  the  soul  and  the  Supersoul.  However,  he  can  know
everything  well  if  he  cares  to  take  shelter  of  the  perfect,  bona  fide  Kåñëa
conscious  spiritual  master.  One  can  know  God  and  one’s  relationship  with
God only when one actually meets a representative of God. A representative
of  God  never  claims  that  he  is  God,  although  he  is  paid  all  the  respect
ordinarily paid to God because he has knowledge of God. One has to learn the
distinction between God and the living entity. Lord Çré Kåñëa therefore stated
in the Second Chapter (2.12) that every living being is individual and that the
Lord  also  is  individual.  They  were  all  individuals  in  the  past,  they  are
individuals at present, and they will continue to be individuals in the future,
even after liberation. At night we see everything as one in the darkness, but in
day,  when  the  sun  is  up,  we  see  everything  in  its  real  identity.  Identity  with

individuality in spiritual life is real knowledge.

TEXT  17

Tad(buÖYaSTadaTMaaNaSTaiàïaSTaTParaYa<aa"

GaC^NTYaPauNarav*ita& jaNaiNaDaURTak-LMaza" )) 17 ))

tad-buddhayas tad-ätmänas
tan-niñöhäs tat-paräyaëäù
gacchanty apunar-ävåttià
jïäna-nirdhüta-kalmañäù

SYNONYMS

tat-buddhayaù—those whose intelligence is always in the Supreme;
tat-ätmänaù—those whose minds are always in the Supreme;
tat-niñöhäù—those whose faith is only meant for the Supreme;
tat-paräyaëäù—who have completely taken shelter of Him; gacchanti—go;
apunaù-ävåttim—to liberation; jïäna—by knowledge; nirdhüta—cleansed;
kalmañäù—misgivings.

TRANSLATION

When one’s intelligence, mind, faith and refuge are all fixed in the Supreme,
then one becomes fully cleansed of misgivings through complete knowledge and
thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Transcendental  Truth 

is  Lord  Kåñëa.  The  whole
Bhagavad-gétä  centers  around  the  declaration  that  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is the version of all Vedic literature. Para-tattva
means the Supreme Reality, who is understood by the knowers of the Supreme
as Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän. Bhagavän, or the Supreme Personality

of Godhead, is the last word in the Absolute. There is nothing more than that.
The  Lord  says,  mattaù  parataraà  nänyat  kiïcid  asti  dhanaïjaya.  Impersonal
Brahman  is  also  supported  by  Kåñëa:  brahmaëo  hi  pratiñöhäham.  Therefore  in
all ways Kåñëa is the Supreme Reality. One whose mind, intelligence, faith and
refuge  are  always  in  Kåñëa,  or,  in  other  words,  one  who  is  fully  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, is undoubtedly washed clean of all misgivings and is in perfect
knowledge in everything concerning transcendence. A Kåñëa conscious person
can  thoroughly  understand  that  there  is  duality  (simultaneous  identity  and
individuality)  in  Kåñëa,  and,  equipped  with  such  transcendental  knowledge,
one can make steady progress on the path of liberation.

TEXT  18

ivÛaivNaYaSaMPaàe b]aø<ae Gaiv hiSTaiNa )

éuiNa cEv ìPaake- c Pai<@Taa" SaMadiXaRNa" )) 18 ))

vidyä-vinaya-sampanne
brähmaëe gavi hastini
çuni caiva çva-päke ca
paëòitäù sama-darçinaù

SYNONYMS

vidyä—with education; vinaya—and gentleness; sampanne—fully equipped;
brähmaëe—in the brähmaëa; gavi—in the cow; hastini—in the elephant;
çuni—in the dog; ca—and; eva—certainly; çva-päke—in the dog-eater (the
outcaste); ca—respectively; paëòitäù—those who are wise;
sama-darçinaù—who see with equal vision.

TRANSLATION

The humble sages, by virtue of true knowledge, see with equal vision a

learned and gentle brähmaëa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater
[outcaste].

PURPORT

A Kåñëa conscious person does not make any distinction between species or
castes. The brähmaëa and the outcaste may be different from the social point
of view, or a dog, a cow, and an elephant may be different from the point of
view  of  species,  but  these  differences  of  body  are  meaningless  from  the
viewpoint  of  a  learned  transcendentalist.  This  is  due  to  their  relationship  to
the Supreme, for the Supreme Lord, by His plenary portion as Paramätmä, is
present  in  everyone’s  heart.  Such  an  understanding  of  the  Supreme  is  real
knowledge. As far as the bodies are concerned in different castes or different
species  of  life,  the  Lord  is  equally  kind  to  everyone  because  He  treats  every
living being as a friend yet maintains Himself as Paramätmä regardless of the
circumstances of the living entities. The Lord as Paramätmä is present both in
the outcaste and in the brähmaëa, although the body of a brähmaëa and that
of  an  outcaste  are  not  the  same.  The  bodies  are  material  productions  of
different modes of material nature, but the soul and the Supersoul within the
body are of the same spiritual quality. The similarity in the quality of the soul
and  the  Supersoul,  however,  does  not  make  them  equal  in  quantity,  for  the
individual soul is present only in that particular body whereas the Paramätmä
is  present  in  each  and  every  body.  A  Kåñëa  conscious  person  has  full
knowledge of this, and therefore he is truly learned and has equal vision. The
similar  characteristics  of  the  soul  and  Supersoul  are  that  they  are  both
conscious, eternal and blissful. But the difference is that the individual soul is
conscious within the limited jurisdiction of the body whereas the Supersoul is
conscious  of  all  bodies.  The  Supersoul  is  present  in  all  bodies  without
distinction.

TEXT  19

whEv TaEiJaRTa" SaGaaeR Yaeza& SaaMYae iSQaTa& MaNa" )

iNadaeRz& ih SaMa& b]ø TaSMaad(b]øi<a Tae iSQaTaa" )) 19 ))

ihaiva tair jitaù sargo
yeñäà sämye sthitaà manaù
nirdoñaà hi samaà brahma
tasmäd brahmaëi te sthitäù

SYNONYMS

iha—in this life; eva—certainly; taiù—by them; jitaù—conquered;
sargaù—birth and death; yeñäm—whose; sämye—in equanimity;
sthitam—situated; manaù—mind; nirdoñam—flawless; hi—certainly;
samam—in equanimity; brahma—like the Supreme; tasmät—therefore;
brahmaëi—in the Supreme; te—they; sthitäù—are situated.

TRANSLATION

Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have already

conquered the conditions of birth and death. They are flawless like Brahman,
and thus they are already situated in Brahman.

PURPORT

Equanimity  of  mind,  as  mentioned  above,  is  the  sign  of  self-realization.
Those who have actually attained to such a stage should be considered to have
conquered  material  conditions,  specifically  birth  and  death.  As  long  as  one
identifies with this body, he is considered a conditioned soul, but as soon as he
is elevated to the stage of equanimity through realization of self, he is liberated
from conditional life. In other words, he is no longer subject to take birth in
the  material  world  but  can  enter  into  the  spiritual  sky  after  his  death.  The
Lord is flawless because He is without attraction or hatred. Similarly, when a
living  entity  is  without  attraction  or  hatred,  he  also  becomes  flawless  and
eligible  to  enter  into  the  spiritual  sky.  Such  persons  are  to  be  considered
already liberated, and their symptoms are described below.

TEXT  20

Na Pa[ôZYaeiTPa[Ya& Pa[aPYa NaaeiÜJaeTPa[aPYa caiPa[YaMa( )

iSQarbuiÖrSaMMaU!ae b]øivd(b]øi<a iSQaTa" )) 20 ))

na prahåñyet priyaà präpya
nodvijet präpya cäpriyam
sthira-buddhir asammüòho
brahma-vid brahmaëi sthitaù

SYNONYMS

na—never; prahåñyet—rejoices; priyam—the pleasant; präpya—achieving;
na—does not; udvijet—become agitated; präpya—obtaining; ca—also;
apriyam—the unpleasant; sthira-buddhiù—self-intelligent;
asammüòhaù—unbewildered; brahma-vit—one who knows the Supreme
perfectly; brahmaëi—in the transcendence; sthitaù—situated.

TRANSLATION

A person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor
laments upon obtaining something unpleasant, who is self-intelligent, who is
unbewildered, and who knows the science of God, is already situated in
transcendence.

PURPORT

The  symptoms  of  the  self-realized  person  are  given  herein.  The  first
symptom is that he is not illusioned by the false identification of the body with
his  true  self.  He  knows  perfectly  well  that  he  is  not  this  body,  but  is  the
fragmental  portion  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  He  is  therefore
not  joyful  in  achieving  something,  nor  does  he  lament  in  losing  anything
which is related to his body. This steadiness of mind is called sthira-buddhi, or
self-intelligence. He is therefore never bewildered by mistaking the gross body
for  the  soul,  nor  does  he  accept  the  body  as  permanent  and  disregard  the

existence of the soul. This knowledge elevates him to the station of knowing
the complete science of the Absolute Truth, namely Brahman, Paramätmä and
Bhagavän.  He  thus  knows  his  constitutional  position  perfectly  well,  without
falsely  trying  to  become  one  with  the  Supreme  in  all  respects.  This  is  called
Brahman  realization,  or  self-realization.  Such  steady  consciousness  is  called
Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  21

baùSPaXaeRZvSa¢-aTMaa ivNdTYaaTMaiNa YaTSau%Ma( )

Sa b]øYaaeGaYau¢-aTMaa Sau%Ma+aYaMaénuTae )) 21 ))

bähya-sparçeñv asaktätmä
vindaty ätmani yat sukham
sa brahma-yoga-yuktätmä
sukham akñayam açnute

SYNONYMS

bähya-sparçeñu—in external sense pleasure; asakta-ätmä—one who is not
attached; vindati—enjoys; ätmani—in the self; yat—that which;
sukham—happiness; saù—he; brahma-yoga—by concentration in Brahman;
yukta-ätmä—self-connected; sukham—happiness; akñayam—unlimited;
açnute—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

Such a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure but is
always in trance, enjoying the pleasure within. In this way the self-realized
person enjoys unlimited happiness, for he concentrates on the Supreme.

PURPORT

Çré Yämunäcärya, a great devotee in Kåñëa consciousness, said:

yad-avadhi mama cetaù kåñëa-pädäravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhämany udyataà rantum äsét
tad-avadhi bata näré-saìgame smaryamäne
bhavati mukha-vikäraù suñöhu niñöhévanaà ca

“Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of Kåñëa,
realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sex pleasure I spit at
the  thought,  and  my  lips  curl  with  distaste.”  A  person  in  brahma-yoga,  or
Kåñëa  consciousness,  is  so  absorbed  in  the  loving  service  of  the  Lord  that  he
loses  his  taste  for  material  sense  pleasure  altogether.  The  highest  pleasure  in
terms of matter is sex pleasure. The whole world is moving under its spell, and
a materialist cannot work at all without this motivation. But a person engaged
in  Kåñëa  consciousness  can  work  with  greater  vigor  without  sex  pleasure,
which  he  avoids.  That  is  the  test  in  spiritual  realization.  Spiritual  realization
and sex pleasure go ill together. A Kåñëa conscious person is not attracted to
any kind of sense pleasure, due to his being a liberated soul.

TEXT  22

Yae ih Sa&SPaXaRJaa >aaeGaa du"%YaaeNaYa Wv Tae )

AaÛNTavNTa" k-aENTaeYa Na Taezu rMaTae buDa" )) 22 ))

ye hi saàsparça-jä bhogä
duùkha-yonaya eva te
ädy-antavantaù kaunteya
na teñu ramate budhaù

SYNONYMS

ye—those; hi—certainly; saàsparça-jäù—by contact with the material senses;
bhogäù—enjoyments; duùkha—distress; yonayaù—sources of; eva—certainly;
te—they are; ädi—beginning; anta—end; vantaù—subject to; kaunteya—O
son of Kunté; na—never; teñu—in those; ramate—takes delight; budhaù—the
intelligent person.

TRANSLATION

An intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery, which are
due to contact with the material senses. O son of Kunté, such pleasures have a
beginning and an end, and so the wise man does not delight in them.

PURPORT

Material sense pleasures are due to the contact of the material senses, which
are all temporary because the body itself is temporary. A liberated soul is not
interested  in  anything  which  is  temporary.  Knowing  well  the  joys  of
transcendental  pleasures,  how  can  a  liberated  soul  agree  to  enjoy  false
pleasure? In the Padma Puräëa it is said:

ramante yogino ’nante
satyänande cid-ätmani
iti räma-padenäsau
paraà brahmäbhidhéyate

“The mystics derive unlimited transcendental pleasures from the Absolute
Truth,  and  therefore  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth,  the  Personality  of
Godhead, is also known as Räma.”

In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam also (5.5.1) it is said:

näyaà deho deha-bhäjäà nå-loke
kañöän kämän arhate viò-bhujäà ye
tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà
çuddhyed yasmäd brahma-saukhyaà tv anantam

“My dear sons, there is no reason to labor very hard for sense pleasure while
in  this  human  form  of  life;  such  pleasures  are  available  to  the  stool-eaters
[hogs].  Rather,  you  should  undergo  penances  in  this  life  by  which  your
existence  will  be  purified,  and  as  a  result  you  will  be  able  to  enjoy  unlimited
transcendental bliss.”

Therefore,  those  who  are  true  yogés  or  learned  transcendentalists  are  not

attracted  by  sense  pleasures,  which  are  the  causes  of  continuous  material
existence.  The  more  one  is  addicted  to  material  pleasures,  the  more  he  is
entrapped by material miseries.

TEXT  23

Xa¥-aeTaqhEv Ya" Saae!u& Pa[aKXarqrivMaae+a<aaTa( )

k-aMa§-aeDaaeÙv& veGa& Sa Yau¢-" Sa Sau%q Nar" )) 23 ))

çaknotéhaiva yaù soòhuà
präk çaréra-vimokñaëät
käma-krodhodbhavaà vegaà
sa yuktaù sa sukhé naraù

SYNONYMS

çaknoti—is able; iha eva—in the present body; yaù—one who; soòhum—to
tolerate; präk—before; çaréra—the body; vimokñaëät—giving up;
käma—desire; krodha—and anger; udbhavam—generated from; vegam—urges;
saù—he; yuktaù—in trance; saù—he; sukhé—happy; naraù—human being.

TRANSLATION

Before giving up this present body, if one is able to tolerate the urges of the
material senses and check the force of desire and anger, he is well situated and
is happy in this world.

PURPORT

If one wants to make steady progress on the path of self-realization, he must
try  to  control  the  forces  of  the  material  senses.  There  are  the  forces  of  talk,
forces  of  anger,  forces  of  mind,  forces  of  the  stomach,  forces  of  the  genitals,
and  forces  of  the  tongue.  One  who  is  able  to  control  the  forces  of  all  these
different senses, and the mind, is called gosvämé, or svämé. Such gosvämés live

strictly controlled lives, and forgo altogether the forces of the senses. Material
desires,  when  unsatiated,  generate  anger,  and  thus  the  mind,  eyes  and  chest
become  agitated.  Therefore,  one  must  practice  to  control  them  before  one
gives  up  this  material  body.  One  who  can  do  this  is  understood  to  be
self-realized and is thus happy in the state of self-realization. It is the duty of
the transcendentalist to try strenuously to control desire and anger.

TEXT  24

Yaae_NTa"Sau%ae_NTararaMaSTaQaaNTaJYaaeRiTarev Ya" )

Sa YaaeGaq b]øiNavaR<a& b]ø>aUTaae_iDaGaC^iTa )) 24 ))

yo ’ntaù-sukho ’ntar-ärämas
tathäntar-jyotir eva yaù
sa yogé brahma-nirväëaà
brahma-bhüto ’dhigacchati

SYNONYMS

yaù—one who; antaù-sukhaù—happy from within; antaù-ärämaù—actively
enjoying within; tathä—as well as; antaù-jyotiù—aiming within;
eva—certainly; yaù—anyone; saù—he; yogé—a mystic;
brahma-nirväëam—liberation in the Supreme; brahma-bhütaù—being
self-realized; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

One whose happiness is within, who is active and rejoices within, and whose
aim is inward is actually the perfect mystic. He is liberated in the Supreme, and
ultimately he attains the Supreme.

PURPORT

Unless one is able to relish happiness from within, how can one retire from

the  external  engagements  meant  for  deriving  superficial  happiness?  A
liberated person enjoys happiness by factual experience. He can, therefore, sit
silently  at  any  place  and  enjoy  the  activities  of  life  from  within.  Such  a
liberated  person  no  longer  desires  external  material  happiness.  This  state  is
called brahma-bhüta, attaining which one is assured of going back to Godhead,
back to home.

TEXT  25

l/>aNTae b]øiNavaR<aMa*zYa" +aq<ak-LMaza" )

i^àÜEDaa YaTaaTMaaNa" SavR>aUTaihTae rTaa" )) 25 ))

labhante brahma-nirväëam
åñayaù kñéëa-kalmañäù
chinna-dvaidhä yatätmänaù
sarva-bhüta-hite ratäù

SYNONYMS

labhante—achieve; brahma-nirväëam—liberation in the Supreme;
åñayaù—those who are active within; kñéëa-kalmañäù—who are devoid of all
sins; chinna—having torn off; dvaidhäù—duality; yata-ätmänaù—engaged in
self-realization; sarva-bhüta—for all living entities; hite—in welfare work;
ratäù—engaged.

TRANSLATION

Those who are beyond the dualities that arise from doubts, whose minds are

engaged within, who are always busy working for the welfare of all living
beings, and who are free from all sins achieve liberation in the Supreme.

PURPORT

Only a person who is fully in Kåñëa consciousness can be said to be engaged

in  welfare  work  for  all  living  entities.  When  a  person  is  actually  in  the
knowledge that Kåñëa is the fountainhead of everything, then when he acts in
that  spirit  he  acts  for  everyone.  The  sufferings  of  humanity  are  due  to
forgetfulness of Kåñëa as the supreme enjoyer, the supreme proprietor, and the
supreme friend. Therefore, to act to revive this consciousness within the entire
human  society  is  the  highest  welfare  work.  One  cannot  be  engaged  in  such
first-class  welfare  work  without  being  liberated  in  the  Supreme.  A  Kåñëa
conscious person has no doubt about the supremacy of Kåñëa. He has no doubt
because he is completely freed from all sins. This is the state of divine love.

A  person  engaged  only  in  ministering  to  the  physical  welfare  of  human
society  cannot  factually  help  anyone.  Temporary  relief  of  the  external  body
and the mind is not satisfactory. The real cause of one’s difficulties in the hard
struggle for life may be found in one’s forgetfulness of his relationship with the
Supreme Lord. When a man is fully conscious of his relationship with Kåñëa,
he is actually a liberated soul, although he may be in the material tabernacle.

TEXT  26

k-aMa§-aeDaivMau¢-aNaa& YaTaqNaa& YaTaceTaSaaMa( )

Ai>aTaae b]øiNavaR<a& vTaRTae ividTaaTMaNaaMa( )) 26 ))

käma-krodha-vimuktänäà
yaténäà yata-cetasäm
abhito brahma-nirväëaà
vartate viditätmanäm

SYNONYMS

käma—from desires; krodha—and anger; vimuktänäm—of those who are
liberated; yaténäm—of the saintly persons; yata-cetasäm—who have full
control over the mind; abhitaù—assured in the near future;
brahma-nirväëam—liberation in the Supreme; vartate—is there;
vidita-ätmanäm—of those who are self-realized.

TRANSLATION

Those who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self-realized,

self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection, are assured of
liberation in the Supreme in the very near future.

PURPORT

Of  the  saintly  persons  who  are  constantly  engaged  in  striving  toward
salvation, one who is in Kåñëa consciousness is the best of all. The Bhägavatam
(4.22.39) confirms this fact as follows:

yat-päda-paìkaja-paläça-viläsa-bhaktyä
karmäçayaà grathitam udgrathayanti santaù
tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo ’pi ruddha-
sroto-gaëäs tam araëaà bhaja väsudevam

“Just  try  to  worship,  in  devotional  service,  Väsudeva,  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even great sages are not able to control the forces of
the  senses  as  effectively  as  those  who  are  engaged  in  transcendental  bliss  by
serving the lotus feet of the Lord, uprooting the deep-grown desire for fruitive
activities.”

In the conditioned soul the desire to enjoy the fruitive results of work is so
deep  rooted  that  it  is  very  difficult  even  for  the  great  sages  to  control  such
desires, despite great endeavors. A devotee of the Lord, constantly engaged in
devotional  service  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  perfect  in  self-realization,  very
quickly attains liberation in the Supreme. Owing to his complete knowledge in
self-realization, he always remains in trance. To cite an analogous example of
this:

darçana-dhyäna-saàsparçair
matsya-kürma-vihaìgamäù
sväny apatyäni puñëanti
tathäham api padma-ja

“By vision, by meditation and by touch only do the fish, the tortoise and the

birds maintain their offspring. Similarly do I also, O Padmaja!”

The  fish  brings  up  its  offspring  simply  by  looking  at  them.  The  tortoise
brings  up  its  offspring  simply  by  meditation.  The  eggs  of  the  tortoise  are  laid
on land, and the tortoise meditates on the eggs while in the water. Similarly,
the devotee in Kåñëa consciousness, although far away from the Lord’s abode,
can  elevate  himself  to  that  abode  simply  by  thinking  of  Him  constantly—by
engagement  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  He  does  not  feel  the  pangs  of  material
miseries; this state of life is called brahma-nirväëa, or the absence of material
miseries due to being constantly immersed in the Supreme.

TEXTS  27–28

SPaXaaRNk*-Tva bihbaRùa&ê+auêEvaNTare >a]uvae" )

Pa[a<aaPaaNaaE SaMaaE k*-Tva NaaSaa>YaNTarcair<aaE )) 27 ))

YaTaeiNd]YaMaNaaebuiÖMauRiNaMaaeR+aParaYa<a" )

ivGaTaeC^a>aYa§-aeDaae Ya" Sada Mau¢- Wv Sa" )) 28 ))

sparçän kåtvä bahir bähyäàç
cakñuç caiväntare bhruvoù
präëäpänau samau kåtvä
näsäbhyantara-cäriëau

yatendriya-mano-buddhir
munir mokña-paräyaëaù
vigatecchä-bhaya-krodho
yaù sadä mukta eva saù

SYNONYMS

sparçän—sense objects, such as sound; kåtvä—keeping; bahiù—external;
bähyän—unnecessary; cakñuù—eyes; ca—also; eva—certainly;
antare—between; bhruvoù—the eyebrows; präëa-apänau—up-and

down-moving air; samau—in suspension; kåtvä—keeping;
näsa-abhyantara—within the nostrils; cäriëau—blowing; yata—controlled;
indriya—senses; manaù—mind; buddhiù—intelligence; muniù—the
transcendentalist; mokña—for liberation; paräyaëaù—being so destined;
vigata—having discarded; icchä—wishes; bhaya—fear; krodhaù—anger;
yaù—one who; sadä—always; muktaù—liberated; eva—certainly; saù—he is.

TRANSLATION

Shutting out all external sense objects, keeping the eyes and vision

concentrated between the two eyebrows, suspending the inward and outward
breaths within the nostrils, and thus controlling the mind, senses and
intelligence, the transcendentalist aiming at liberation becomes free from desire,
fear and anger. One who is always in this state is certainly liberated.

PURPORT

Being  engaged  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  can  immediately  understand
one’s  spiritual  identity,  and  then  one  can  understand  the  Supreme  Lord  by
means of devotional service. When one is well situated in devotional service,
one comes to the transcendental position, qualified to feel the presence of the
Lord in the sphere of one’s activity. This particular position is called liberation
in the Supreme.

After  explaining  the  above  principles  of  liberation  in  the  Supreme,  the
Lord gives instruction to Arjuna as to how one can come to that position by
the practice of the mysticism or yoga known as añöäìga-yoga, which is divisible
into  an  eightfold  procedure  called  yama,  niyama,  äsana,  präëäyäma,
pratyähära, dhäraëä, dhyäna and samädhi. In the Sixth Chapter the subject of
yoga  is  explicitly  detailed,  and  at  the  end of  the  Fifth  it  is  only  preliminarily
explained. One has to drive out the sense objects such as sound, touch, form,
taste and smell by the pratyähära process in yoga, and then keep the vision of
the  eyes  between  the  two  eyebrows  and  concentrate  on  the  tip  of  the  nose
with half-closed lids. There is no benefit in closing the eyes altogether, because
then there is every chance of falling asleep. Nor is there benefit in opening the

eyes  completely,  because  then  there  is  the  hazard  of  being  attracted  by  sense
objects.  The  breathing  movement  is  restrained  within  the  nostrils  by
neutralizing the up-moving and down-moving air within the body. By practice
of such yoga one is able to gain control over the senses, refrain from outward
sense objects, and thus prepare oneself for liberation in the Supreme.

This  yoga  process  helps  one  become  free  from  all  kinds  of  fear  and  anger
and thus feel the presence of the Supersoul in the transcendental situation. In
other  words,  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  the  easiest  process  of  executing  yoga
principles.  This  will  be  thoroughly  explained  in  the  next  chapter.  A  Kåñëa
conscious  person,  however,  being  always  engaged  in  devotional  service,  does
not  risk  losing  his  senses  to  some  other  engagement.  This  is  a  better  way  of
controlling the senses than by the añöäìga-yoga.

TEXT  29

>aae¢-ar& YajTaPaSaa& SavRl/aek-MaheìrMa( )

Sauôd& SavR>aUTaaNaa& jaTva Maa& XaaiNTaMa*C^iTa )) 29 ))

bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati

SYNONYMS

bhoktäram—the beneficiary; yajïa—of sacrifices; tapasäm—and penances and
austerities; sarva-loka—of all planets and the demigods thereof;
mahä-éçvaram—the Supreme Lord; su-hådam—the benefactor; sarva—of all;
bhütänäm—the living entities; jïätvä—thus knowing; mäm—Me (Lord
Kåñëa); çäntim—relief from material pangs; åcchati—one achieves.

TRANSLATION

A person in full consciousness of Me, knowing Me to be the ultimate

beneficiary of all sacrifices and austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and
demigods, and the benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attains peace
from the pangs of material miseries.

PURPORT

The conditioned souls within the clutches of illusory energy are all anxious
to  attain  peace  in  the  material  world.  But  they  do  not  know  the  formula  for
peace, which is explained in this part of the Bhagavad-gétä. The greatest peace
formula  is  simply  this:  Lord  Kåñëa  is  the  beneficiary  in  all  human  activities.
Men should offer everything to the transcendental service of the Lord because
He is the proprietor of all planets and the demigods thereon. No one is greater
than He. He is greater than the greatest of the demigods, Lord Çiva and Lord
Brahmä.  In  the  Vedas  (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad  6.7)  the  Supreme  Lord  is
described as tam éçvaräëäà paramaà maheçvaraà. Under the spell of illusion,
living  entities  are  trying  to  be  lords  of  all  they  survey,  but  actually  they  are
dominated  by  the  material  energy  of  the  Lord.  The  Lord  is  the  master  of
material  nature,  and  the  conditioned  souls  are  under  the  stringent  rules  of
material nature. Unless one understands these bare facts, it is not possible to
achieve peace in the world either individually or collectively. This is the sense
of Kåñëa consciousness: Lord Kåñëa is the supreme predominator, and all living
entities,  including  the  great  demigods,  are  His  subordinates.  One  can  attain
perfect peace only in complete Kåñëa consciousness.

This  Fifth  Chapter  is  a  practical  explanation  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,
generally known as karma-yoga. The question of mental speculation as to how
karma-yoga  can  give  liberation  is  answered  herewith.  To  work  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  to  work  with  the  complete  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  the
predominator.  Such  work  is  not  different  from  transcendental  knowledge.
Direct Kåñëa consciousness is bhakti-yoga, and jïäna-yoga is a path leading to
bhakti-yoga.  Kåñëa  consciousness  means  to  work  in  full  knowledge  of  one’s
relationship  with  the  Supreme  Absolute,  and  the  perfection  of  this
consciousness  is  full  knowledge  of  Kåñëa,  or  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead. A pure soul is the eternal servant of God as His fragmental part and

parcel. He comes into contact with mäyä (illusion) due to the desire to lord it
over  mäyä,  and  that  is  the  cause  of  his  many  sufferings.  As  long  as  he  is  in
contact  with  matter,  he  has  to  execute  work  in  terms  of  material  necessities.
Kåñëa consciousness, however, brings one into spiritual life even while one is
within the jurisdiction of matter, for it is an arousing of spiritual existence by
practice in the material world. The more one is advanced, the more he is freed
from the clutches of matter. The Lord is not partial toward anyone. Everything
depends  on  one’s  practical  performance  of  duties  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,
which helps one control the senses in every respect and conquer the influence
of  desire  and  anger.  And  one  who  stands  fast  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,
the
controlling 
transcendental  stage,  or  brahma-nirväëa.  The  eightfold  yoga  mysticism  is
automatically practiced in Kåñëa consciousness because the ultimate purpose is
served. There is a gradual process of elevation in the practice of yama, niyama,
äsana,  präëäyäma,  pratyähära,  dhäraëä,  dhyäna  and  samädhi.  But  these  only
preface perfection by devotional service, which alone can award peace to the
human being. It is the highest perfection of life.

the  abovementioned  passions, 

factually 

remains 

in 

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Karma-yoga, or Action in Kåñëa Consciousness.

- CHAPTER 6 -
Dhyäna-yoga

TEXT  1

é[q>aGavaNauvac

ANaaié[Ta" k-MaRf-l&/ k-aYa| k-MaR k-raeiTa Ya" )

Sa SaNNYaaSaq c YaaeGaq c Na iNariGanNaR cai§-Ya" )) 1 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
anäçritaù karma-phalaà
käryaà karma karoti yaù
sa sannyäsé ca yogé ca
na niragnir na cäkriyaù

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Lord said; anäçritaù—without taking shelter;
karma-phalam—of the result of work; käryam—obligatory; karma—work;
karoti—performs; yaù—one who; saù—he; sannyäsé—in the renounced order;
ca—also; yogé—mystic; ca—also; na—not; niù—without; agniù—fire;
na—nor; ca—also; akriyaù—without duty.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One who is unattached to the
fruits of his work and who works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of
life, and he is the true mystic, not he who lights no fire and performs no duty.

PURPORT

In  this  chapter  the  Lord  explains  that  the  process  of  the  eightfold  yoga
system  is  a  means  to  control  the  mind  and  the  senses.  However,  this  is  very
difficult  for  people  in  general  to  perform,  especially  in  the  Age  of  Kali.
Although the eightfold yoga system is recommended in this chapter, the Lord
emphasizes that the process of karma-yoga, or acting in Kåñëa consciousness, is
better.  Everyone  acts  in  this  world  to  maintain  his  family  and  their
paraphernalia, but no one is working without some self-interest, some personal
gratification, be it concentrated or extended. The criterion of perfection is to
act in Kåñëa consciousness, and not with a view to enjoying the fruits of work.

To act in Kåñëa consciousness is the duty of every living entity because all are
constitutionally parts and parcels of the Supreme. The parts of the body work
for  the  satisfaction  of  the  whole  body.  The  limbs  of  the  body  do  not  act  for
self-satisfaction  but  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  complete  whole.  Similarly,  the
living  entity  who  acts  for  satisfaction  of  the  supreme  whole  and  not  for
personal satisfaction is the perfect sannyäsé, the perfect yogi.

The sannyäsés sometimes artificially think that they have become liberated
from all material duties, and therefore they cease to perform agnihotra yajïas
(fire  sacrifices),  but  actually  they  are  self-interested  because  their  goal  is  to
become  one  with  the  impersonal  Brahman.  Such  a  desire  is  greater  than  any
material  desire,  but  it  is  not  without  self-interest.  Similarly,  the  mystic  yogé
who  practices  the  yoga  system  with  half-open  eyes,  ceasing  all  material
activities, desires some satisfaction for his personal self. But a person acting in
Kåñëa  consciousness  works  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  whole,  without
self-interest. A Kåñëa conscious person has no desire for self-satisfaction. His
criterion  of  success  is  the  satisfaction  of  Kåñëa,  and  thus  he  is  the  perfect
sannyäsé,  or  perfect  yogé.  Lord  Caitanya,  the  highest  perfectional  symbol  of
renunciation, prays in this way:

na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà
kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye
mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi

“O  Almighty  Lord,  I  have  no  desire  to  accumulate  wealth,  nor  to  enjoy
beautiful women. Nor do I want any number of followers. What I want only is
the causeless mercy of Your devotional service in my life, birth after birth.”

TEXT  2

Ya& SaNNYaaSaiMaiTa Pa[ahuYaaeRGa& Ta& iviÖ Paa<@v )

Na ùSaNNYaSTaSaªLPaae YaaeGaq >aviTa k-êNa )) 2 ))

yaà sannyäsam iti prähur

yogaà taà viddhi päëòava
na hy asannyasta-saìkalpo
yogé bhavati kaçcana

SYNONYMS

yam—what; sannyäsam—renunciation; iti—thus; prähuù—they say;
yogam—linking with the Supreme; tam—that; viddhi—you must know;
päëòava—O son of Päëòu; na—never; hi—certainly; asannyasta—without
giving up; saìkalpaù—desire for self-satisfaction; yogé—a mystic
transcendentalist; bhavati—becomes; kaçcana—anyone.

TRANSLATION

What is called renunciation you should know to be the same as yoga, or
linking oneself with the Supreme, O son of Päëòu, for one can never become a
yogé unless he renounces the desire for sense gratification.

PURPORT

Real sannyäsa-yoga or bhakti means that one should know his constitutional
position  as  the  living  entity,  and  act  accordingly.  The  living  entity  has  no
separate  independent  identity.  He  is  the  marginal  energy  of  the  Supreme.
When  he  is  entrapped  by  material energy, he is conditioned, and when he is
Kåñëa  conscious,  or  aware  of  the  spiritual  energy,  then  he  is  in  his  real  and
natural state of life. Therefore, when one is in complete knowledge, one ceases
all  material  sense  gratification,  or  renounces  all  kinds  of  sense  gratificatory
activities. This is practiced by the yogés who restrain the senses from material
attachment. But a person in Kåñëa consciousness has no opportunity to engage
his  senses  in  anything  which  is  not  for  the  purpose  of  Kåñëa.  Therefore,  a
Kåñëa conscious person is simultaneously a sannyäsé and a yogé. The purpose of
knowledge  and  of  restraining  the  senses,  as  prescribed  in  the  jïäna  and  yoga
processes,  is  automatically  served  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  If  one  is  unable  to
give up the activities of his selfish nature, then jïäna and yoga are of no avail.

The  real  aim  is  for  a  living  entity  to  give  up  all  selfish  satisfaction  and  to  be
prepared  to  satisfy  the  Supreme.  A  Kåñëa  conscious  person  has  no  desire  for
any  kind  of  self-enjoyment.  He  is  always  engaged  for  the  enjoyment  of  the
Supreme.  One  who  has  no  information  of  the  Supreme  must  therefore  be
engaged  in  self-satisfaction,  because  no  one  can  stand  on  the  platform  of
inactivity.  All  purposes  are  perfectly  served  by  the  practice  of  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  3

Aaåå+aaeMauRNaeYaaeRGa& k-MaR k-ar<aMauCYaTae )

YaaeGaaæ!SYa TaSYaEv XaMa" k-ar<aMauCYaTae )) 3 ))

ärurukñor muner yogaà
karma käraëam ucyate
yogärüòhasya tasyaiva
çamaù käraëam ucyate

SYNONYMS

ärurukñoù—who has just begun yoga; muneù—of the sage; yogam—the
eightfold yoga system; karma—work; käraëam—the means; ucyate—is said to
be; yoga—eightfold yoga; ärüòhasya—of one who has attained; tasya—his;
eva—certainly; çamaù—cessation of all material activities; käraëam—the
means; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to be
the means; and for one who is already elevated in yoga, cessation of all material
activities is said to be the means.

PURPORT

The  process  of  linking  oneself  with  the  Supreme  is  called  yoga.  It  may  be
compared  to  a  ladder  for  attaining  the  topmost  spiritual  realization.  This
ladder begins from the lowest material condition of the living entity and rises
up  to  perfect  self-realization  in  pure  spiritual  life.  According  to  various
elevations, different parts of the ladder are known by different names. But all
in all, the complete ladder is called yoga and may be divided into three parts,
namely jïäna-yoga, dhyäna-yoga and bhakti-yoga. The beginning of the ladder
is called the yogärurukñu stage, and the highest rung is called yogärüòha.

Concerning  the  eightfold  yoga  system,  attempts  in  the  beginning  to  enter
into meditation through regulative principles of life and practice of different
sitting  postures  (which  are  more  or  less  bodily  exercises)  are  considered
fruitive material activities. All such activities lead to achieving perfect mental
equilibrium to control the senses. When one is accomplished in the practice of
meditation, he ceases all disturbing mental activities.

A Kåñëa conscious person, however, is situated from the beginning on the
platform  of  meditation  because  he  always  thinks  of  Kåñëa.  And,  being
constantly engaged in the service of Kåñëa, he is considered to have ceased all
material activities.

TEXT  4

Yada ih NaeiNd]YaaQaeRzu Na k-MaRSvNauzÂTae )

SavRSaªLPaSaNNYaaSaq YaaeGaaæ!STadaeCYaTae )) 4 ))

yadä hi nendriyärtheñu
na karmasv anuñajjate
sarva-saìkalpa-sannyäsé
yogärüòhas tadocyate

SYNONYMS

yadä—when; hi—certainly; na—not; indriya-artheñu—in sense gratification;
na—never; karmasu—in fruitive activities; anuñajjate—one necessarily

engages; sarva-saìkalpa—of all material desires; sannyäsé—renouncer;
yoga-ärüòhaù—elevated in yoga; tadä—at that time; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to be elevated in yoga when, having renounced all material
desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engages in fruitive activities.

PURPORT

When a person is fully engaged in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord,  he  is  pleased  in  himself,  and  thus  he  is  no  longer  engaged  in  sense
gratification or in fruitive activities. Otherwise, one must be engaged in sense
gratification,  since  one  cannot  live  without  engagement.  Without  Kåñëa
consciousness,  one  must  be  always  seeking  self-centered  or  extended  selfish
activities. But a Kåñëa conscious person can do everything for the satisfaction
of Kåñëa and thereby be perfectly detached from sense gratification. One who
has no such realization must mechanically try to escape material desires before
being elevated to the top rung of the yoga ladder.

TEXT  5

oÖredaTMaNaaTMaaNa& NaaTMaaNaMavSaadYaeTa( )

AaTMaEv ùaTMaNaae bNDauraTMaEv irPauraTMaNa" )) 5 ))

uddhared ätmanätmänaà
nätmänam avasädayet
ätmaiva hy ätmano bandhur
ätmaiva ripur ätmanaù

SYNONYMS

uddharet—one must deliver; ätmanä—by the mind; ätmänam—the
conditioned soul; na—never; ätmänam—the conditioned soul;

avasädayet—put into degradation; ätmä—mind; eva—certainly; hi—indeed;
ätmanaù—of the conditioned soul; bandhuù—friend; ätmä—mind;
eva—certainly; ripuù—enemy; ätmanaù—of the conditioned soul.

TRANSLATION

One must deliver himself with the help of his mind, and not degrade himself.

The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.

PURPORT

The  word  ätmä  denotes  body,  mind  and  soul—depending  upon  different
circumstances.  In  the  yoga  system,  the  mind  and  the  conditioned  soul  are
especially important. Since the mind is the central point of yoga practice, ätmä
refers here to the mind. The purpose of the yoga system is to control the mind
and to draw it away from attachment to sense objects. It is stressed herein that
the mind must be so trained that it can deliver the conditioned soul from the
mire  of  nescience.  In  material  existence  one  is  subjected  to  the  influence  of
the  mind  and  the  senses.  In  fact,  the  pure  soul  is  entangled  in  the  material
world because the mind is involved with the false ego, which desires to lord it
over material nature. Therefore, the mind should be trained so that it will not
be attracted by the glitter of material nature, and in this way the conditioned
soul  may  be  saved.  One  should  not  degrade  oneself  by  attraction  to  sense
objects.  The  more  one  is  attracted  by  sense  objects,  the  more  one  becomes
entangled  in  material  existence.  The  best  way  to  disentangle  oneself  is  to
always  engage  the  mind  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  The  word  hi  is  used  for
emphasizing this point, i.e., that one must do this. It is also said:

mana eva manuñyäëäà
käraëaà bandha-mokñayoù
bandhäya viñayäsaìgo
muktyai nirviñayaà manaù

“For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of liberation.
Mind  absorbed  in  sense  objects  is  the  cause  of  bondage,  and  mind  detached

from  the  sense  objects  is  the  cause  of  liberation.”  (Amåta-bindu Upaniñad  2)
Therefore,  the  mind  which  is  always  engaged  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  the
cause of supreme liberation.

TEXT  6

bNDauraTMaaTMaNaSTaSYa YaeNaaTMaEvaTMaNaa iJaTa" )

ANaaTMaNaSTau Xa}auTve vTaeRTaaTMaEv Xa}auvTa( )) 6 ))

bandhur ätmätmanas tasya
yenätmaivätmanä jitaù
anätmanas tu çatrutve
vartetätmaiva çatru-vat

SYNONYMS

bandhuù—friend; ätmä—the mind; ätmanaù—of the living entity; tasya—of
him; yena—by whom; ätmä—the mind; eva—certainly; ätmanä—by the living
entity; jitaù—conquered; anätmanaù—of one who has failed to control the
mind; tu—but; çatrutve—because of enmity; varteta—remains; ätmä eva—the
very mind; çatru-vat—as an enemy.

TRANSLATION

For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends; but for

one who has failed to do so, his mind will remain the greatest enemy.

PURPORT

The purpose of practicing eightfold yoga is to control the mind in order to
make  it  a  friend  in  discharging  the  human  mission.  Unless  the  mind  is
controlled, the practice of yoga (for show) is simply a waste of time. One who
cannot control his mind lives always with the greatest enemy, and thus his life
and its mission are spoiled. The constitutional position of the living entity is to

carry  out  the  order  of  the  superior.  As  long  as  one’s  mind  remains  an
unconquered  enemy,  one  has  to  serve  the  dictations  of  lust,  anger,  avarice,
illusion, etc. But when the mind is conquered, one voluntarily agrees to abide
by  the  dictation  of  the  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is  situated  within  the
heart  of  everyone  as  Paramätmä.  Real  yoga  practice  entails  meeting  the
Paramätmä  within  the  heart  and  then  following  His  dictation.  For  one  who
takes to Kåñëa consciousness directly, perfect surrender to the dictation of the
Lord follows automatically.

TEXT  7

iJaTaaTMaNa" Pa[XaaNTaSYa ParMaaTMaa SaMaaihTa" )

XaqTaaeZ<aSau%du"%ezu TaQaa MaaNaaPaMaaNaYaae" )) 7 ))

jitätmanaù praçäntasya
paramätmä samähitaù
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkheñu
tathä mänäpamänayoù

SYNONYMS

jita-ätmanaù—of one who has conquered his mind; praçäntasya—who has
attained tranquillity by such control over the mind; parama-ätmä—the
Supersoul; samähitaù—approached completely; çéta—in cold; uñëa—heat;
sukha—happiness; duùkheñu—and distress; tathä—also; mäna—in honor;
apamänayoù—and dishonor.

TRANSLATION

For one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached, for

he has attained tranquillity. To such a man happiness and distress, heat and
cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.

PURPORT

Actually,  every  living  entity  is  intended  to  abide  by  the  dictation  of  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is  seated  in  everyone’s  heart  as
Paramätmä.  When  the  mind  is  misled  by  the  external,  illusory  energy,  one
becomes  entangled  in  material  activities.  Therefore,  as  soon  as  one’s  mind  is
controlled through one of the yoga systems, one should be considered to have
already reached the destination. One has to abide by superior dictation. When
one’s mind is fixed on the superior nature, he has no alternative but to follow
the  dictation  of  the  Supreme.  The  mind  must  admit  some  superior  dictation
and  follow  it.  The  effect  of  controlling  the  mind  is  that  one  automatically
follows  the  dictation  of  the  Paramätmä,  or  Supersoul.  Because  this
transcendental  position  is  at  once  achieved  by  one  who  is  in  Kåñëa
consciousness,  the  devotee  of  the  Lord  is  unaffected  by  the  dualities  of
material  existence,  namely  distress  and  happiness,  cold  and  heat,  etc.  This
state is practical samädhi, or absorption in the Supreme.

TEXT  8

jaNaivjaNaTa*áaTMaa kU-$=SQaae iviJaTaeiNd]Ya" )

Yau¢- wTYauCYaTae YaaeGaq SaMal/aeí\aXMak-aÄNa" )) 8 ))

jïäna-vijïäna-tåptätmä
küöa-stho vijitendriyaù
yukta ity ucyate yogé
sama-loñöräçma-käïcanaù

SYNONYMS

jïäna—by acquired knowledge; vijïäna—and realized knowledge;
tåpta—satisfied; ätmä—a living entity; küöa-sthaù—spiritually situated;
vijita-indriyaù—sensually controlled; yuktaù—competent for self-realization;
iti—thus; ucyate—is said; yogé—a mystic; sama—equipoised; loñöra—pebbles;
açma—stone; käïcanaù—gold.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a yogé [or

mystic] when he is fully satisfied by virtue of acquired knowledge and
realization. Such a person is situated in transcendence and is self-controlled. He
sees everything—whether it be pebbles, stones or gold—as the same.

PURPORT

Book knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is useless. This is

stated as follows:

ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù

“No  one  can  understand  the  transcendental  nature  of  the  name,  form,
quality and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa through his materially contaminated senses.
Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the
Lord  are  the  transcendental  name,  form,  quality  and  pastimes  of  the  Lord
revealed to him.” (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.234)

This  Bhagavad-gétä  is  the  science  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  No  one  can
become  Kåñëa  conscious  simply  by  mundane  scholarship.  One  must  be
fortunate  enough  to  associate  with  a  person  who  is  in  pure  consciousness.  A
Kåñëa conscious person has realized knowledge, by the grace of Kåñëa, because
he  is  satisfied  with  pure  devotional  service.  By  realized  knowledge,  one
becomes  perfect.  By  transcendental  knowledge  one  can  remain  steady  in  his
convictions,  but  by  mere  academic  knowledge  one  can  be  easily  deluded  and
confused  by  apparent  contradictions.  It  is  the  realized  soul  who  is  actually
self-controlled,  because  he  is  surrendered  to  Kåñëa.  He  is  transcendental
because  he  has  nothing  to  do  with  mundane  scholarship.  For  him  mundane
scholarship and mental speculation, which may be as good as gold to others, are
of no greater value than pebbles or stones.

TEXT  9

SauôiNMa}aaYauRdaSaqNaMaDYaSQaÜeZYabNDauzu )

SaaDauZviPa c PaaPaezu SaMabuiÖivRiXaZYaTae )) 9 ))

suhån-miträry-udäséna-
madhyastha-dveñya-bandhuñu
sädhuñv api ca päpeñu
sama-buddhir viçiñyate

SYNONYMS

su-håt—to well-wishers by nature; mitra—benefactors with affection;
ari—enemies; udäséna—neutrals between belligerents;
madhya-stha—mediators between belligerents; dveñya—the envious;
bandhuñu—and the relatives or well-wishers; sädhuñu—unto the pious; api—as
well as; ca—and; päpeñu—unto the sinners; sama-buddhiù—having equal
intelligence; viçiñyate—is far advanced.

TRANSLATION

A person is considered still further advanced when he regards honest
well-wishers, affectionate benefactors, the neutral, mediators, the envious,
friends and enemies, the pious and the sinners all with an equal mind.

TEXT  10

YaaeGaq YauÅqTa SaTaTaMaaTMaaNa& rhiSa iSQaTa" )

Wk-ak-I YaTaictaaTMaa iNaraXaqrPairGa]h" )) 10 ))

yogé yuïjéta satatam
ätmänaà rahasi sthitaù

ekäké yata-cittätmä
niräçér aparigrahaù

SYNONYMS

yogé—a transcendentalist; yuïjéta—must concentrate in Kåñëa consciousness;
satatam—constantly; ätmänam—himself (by body, mind and self); rahasi—in
a secluded place; sthitaù—being situated; ekäké—alone;
yata-citta-ätmä—always careful in mind; niräçéù—without being attracted by
anything else; aparigrahaù—free from the feeling of possessiveness.

TRANSLATION

A transcendentalist should always engage his body, mind and self in
relationship with the Supreme; he should live alone in a secluded place and
should always carefully control his mind. He should be free from desires and
feelings of possessiveness.

PURPORT

Kåñëa  is  realized  in  different  degrees  as  Brahman,  Paramätmä  and  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kåñëa consciousness means, concisely, to be
always  engaged  in  the  transcendental  loving  service  of  the  Lord.  But  those
who  are  attached  to  the  impersonal  Brahman  or  the  localized  Supersoul  are
also partially Kåñëa conscious, because impersonal Brahman is the spiritual ray
of  Kåñëa  and  Supersoul  is  the  all-pervading partial expansion of Kåñëa. Thus
the  impersonalist  and  the  meditator  are  also  indirectly  Kåñëa  conscious.  A
directly Kåñëa conscious person is the topmost transcendentalist because such
a devotee knows what is meant by Brahman and Paramätmä. His knowledge of
the  Absolute  Truth  is  perfect,  whereas  the  impersonalist  and  the  meditative
yogé are imperfectly Kåñëa conscious.

Nevertheless, all of these are instructed herewith to be constantly engaged
in  their  particular  pursuits  so  that  they  may  come  to  the  highest  perfection
sooner  or  later.  The  first  business  of  a  transcendentalist  is  to  keep  the  mind

always on Kåñëa. One should always think of Kåñëa and not forget Him even
for a moment. Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is called samädhi, or
trance.  In  order  to  concentrate  the  mind,  one  should  always  remain  in
seclusion and avoid disturbance by external objects. He should be very careful
to  accept  favorable  and  reject  unfavorable  conditions  that  affect  his
realization.  And,  in  perfect  determination,  he  should  not  hanker  after
unnecessary material things that entangle him by feelings of possessiveness.

All  these  perfections  and  precautions  are  perfectly  executed  when  one  is
directly  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  because  direct  Kåñëa  consciousness  means
self-abnegation, wherein there is very little chance for material possessiveness.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé characterizes Kåñëa consciousness in this way:

anäsaktasya viñayän
yathärham upayuïjataù
nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe
yuktaà vairägyam ucyate

präpaïcikatayä buddhyä
hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo
vairägyaà phalgu kathyate

“When  one  is  not  attached  to  anything,  but  at  the  same  time  accepts
everything  in  relation  to  Kåñëa,  one  is  rightly  situated  above  possessiveness.
On  the  other  hand,  one  who  rejects  everything  without  knowledge  of  its
renunciation.”
is  not  as  complete 
relationship 
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 2.255–256)

to  Kåñëa 

in  his 

A Kåñëa conscious person well knows that everything belongs to Kåñëa, and
thus he is always free from feelings of personal possession. As such, he has no
hankering for anything on his own personal account. He knows how to accept
things in favor of Kåñëa consciousness and how to reject things unfavorable to
Kåñëa  consciousness.  He  is  always  aloof  from  material  things  because  he  is
always  transcendental,  and  he  is  always  alone,  having  nothing  to  do  with
persons not in Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore a person in Kåñëa consciousness
is the perfect yogé.

TEXTS  11–12

éucaE deXae Pa[iTaïaPYa iSQarMaaSaNaMaaTMaNa" )

NaaTYauiC^\Ta& NaaiTaNaqc& cEl/aiJaNaku-XaaetarMa( )) 11 ))

Ta}aEk-aGa]& MaNa" k*-Tva YaTaictaeiNd]Yai§-Ya" )

oPaivXYaaSaNae YauHJYaaÛaeGaMaaTMaivéuÖYae )) 12 ))

çucau deçe pratiñöhäpya
sthiram äsanam ätmanaù
näty-ucchritaà näti-nécaà
cailäjina-kuçottaram

tatraikägraà manaù kåtvä
yata-cittendriya-kriyaù
upaviçyäsane yuïjyäd
yogam ätma-viçuddhaye

SYNONYMS

çucau—in a sanctified; deçe—land; pratiñöhäpya—placing; sthiram—firm;
äsanam—seat; ätmanaù—his own; na—not; ati—too; ucchritam—high;
na—nor; ati—too; nécam—low; caila-ajina—of soft cloth and deerskin;
kuça—and kuça grass; uttaram—covering; tatra—thereupon; eka-agram—with
one attention; manaù—mind; kåtvä—making; yata-citta—controlling the
mind; indriya—senses; kriyaù—and activities; upaviçya—sitting; äsane—on
the seat; yuïjyät—should execute; yogam—yoga practice; ätma—the heart;
viçuddhaye—for clarifying.

TRANSLATION

To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kuça grass

on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth. The seat
should be neither too high nor too low and should be situated in a sacred place.

The yogé should then sit on it very firmly and practice yoga to purify the heart
by controlling his mind, senses and activities and fixing the mind on one point.

PURPORT

“Sacred  place”  refers  to  places  of  pilgrimage.  In  India  the  yogés,  the
transcendentalists or the devotees, all leave home and reside in sacred places
such as Prayäga, Mathurä, Våndävana, Håñékeça and Hardwar and in solitude
practice  yoga  where  the  sacred  rivers  like  the  Yamunä  and  the  Ganges  flow.
But  often  this  is  not  possible,  especially  for  Westerners.  The  so-called  yoga
societies  in  big  cities  may  be  successful  in  earning  material  benefit,  but  they
are  not  at  all  suitable  for  the  actual  practice  of  yoga.  One  who  is  not
self-controlled and whose mind is not undisturbed cannot practice meditation.
Therefore,  in  the  Båhan-näradéya  Puräëa  it  is  said  that  in  Kali-yuga  (the
present yuga, or age), when people in general are short-lived, slow in spiritual
realization  and  always  disturbed  by  various  anxieties,  the  best  means  of
spiritual realization is chanting the holy name of the Lord.

harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
 [Adi 17.21]

“In  this  age  of  quarrel  and  hypocrisy  the  only  means  of  deliverance  is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other
way. There is no other way.”

TEXTS

 13–14

SaMa& k-aYaiXaraeGa]qv& DaarYaàcl&/ iSQar" )

SaMPa[e+Ya NaaiSak-aGa]& Sv& idXaêaNavl/aek-YaNa( )) 13 ))

Pa[XaaNTaaTMaa ivGaTa>aqb]Røcairv]Tae iSQaTa" )

MaNa" Sa&YaMYa MaiÀtaae Yau¢- AaSaqTa MaTPar" )) 14 ))

samaà käya-çiro-grévaà
dhärayann acalaà sthiraù
samprekñya näsikägraà svaà
diçaç cänavalokayan

praçäntätmä vigata-bhér
brahmacäri-vrate sthitaù
manaù saàyamya mac-citto
yukta äséta mat-paraù

SYNONYMS

samam—straight; käya—body; çiraù—head; grévam—and neck;
dhärayan—holding; acalam—unmoving; sthiraù—still; samprekñya—looking;
näsikä—of the nose; agram—at the tip; svam—own; diçaù—on all sides;
ca—also; anavalokayan—not looking; praçänta—unagitated; ätmä—mind;
vigata-bhéù—devoid of fear; brahmacäri-vrate—in the vow of celibacy;
sthitaù—situated; manaù—mind; saàyamya—completely subduing;
mat—upon Me (Kåñëa); cittaù—concentrating the mind; yuktaù—the actual
yogi; äséta—should sit; mat—Me; paraù—the ultimate goal.

TRANSLATION

One should hold one’s body, neck and head erect in a straight line and stare
steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated, subdued mind, devoid
of fear, completely free from sex life, one should meditate upon Me within the
heart and make Me the ultimate goal of life.

PURPORT

The goal of life is to know Kåñëa, who is situated within the heart of every
living  being  as  Paramätmä,  the  four-handed  Viñëu  form.  The  yoga  process  is
practiced in order to discover and see this localized form of Viñëu, and not for

any  other  purpose.  The  localized  viñëu-mürti  is  the  plenary  representation  of
Kåñëa  dwelling  within  one’s  heart.  One  who  has  no  program  to  realize  this
viñëu-mürti is uselessly engaged in mock yoga practice and is certainly wasting
his time. Kåñëa is the ultimate goal of life, and the viñëu-mürti situated in one’s
heart is the object of yoga practice. To realize this viñëu-mürti within the heart,
one  has  to  observe  complete  abstinence  from  sex  life;  therefore  one  has  to
leave home and live alone in a secluded place, remaining seated as mentioned
above.  One  cannot  enjoy  sex  life  daily  at  home  or  elsewhere  and  attend  a
so-called yoga class and thus become a yogé. One has to practice controlling the
mind and avoiding all kinds of sense gratification, of which sex life is the chief.
In the rules of celibacy written by the great sage Yäjïavalkya it is said:

karmaëä manasä väcä
sarvävasthäsu sarvadä
sarvatra maithuna-tyägo
brahmacaryaà pracakñate

“The vow of brahmacarya is meant to help one completely abstain from sex
indulgence  in  work,  words  and  mind—at  all  times,  under  all  circumstances,
and  in  all  places.”  No  one  can  perform  correct  yoga  practice  through  sex
indulgence.  Brahmacarya  is  taught,  therefore,  from  childhood,  when  one  has
no knowledge of sex life. Children at the age of five are sent to the guru-kula,
or the place of the spiritual master, and the master trains the young boys in the
strict  discipline  of  becoming  brahmacärés.  Without  such  practice,  no  one  can
make  advancement  in  any  yoga,  whether  it  be  dhyäna,  jïäna  or  bhakti.  One
who, however, follows the rules and regulations of married life, having a sexual
relationship only with his wife (and that also under regulation), is also called a
brahmacäré. Such a restrained householder brahmacäré may be accepted in the
bhakti school, but the jïäna and dhyäna schools do not even admit householder
brahmacärés.  They  require  complete  abstinence  without  compromise.  In  the
bhakti school, a householder brahmacäré is allowed controlled sex life because
the  cult  of  bhakti-yoga  is  so  powerful  that  one  automatically  loses  sexual
attraction,  being  engaged  in  the  superior  service  of  the  Lord.  In  the
Bhagavad-gétä (2.59) it is said:

viñayä vinivartante
nirähärasya dehinaù
rasa-varjaà raso ’py asya
paraà dåñövä nivartate

Whereas others are forced to restrain themselves from sense gratification, a
devotee  of  the  Lord  automatically  refrains  because  of  superior  taste.  Other
than the devotee, no one has any information of that superior taste.

Vigata-bhéù.  One  cannot  be  fearless  unless  one  is  fully  in  Kåñëa
consciousness. A conditioned soul is fearful due to his perverted memory, his
forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Kåñëa. The Bhägavatam (11.2.37)
says,  bhayaà  dvitéyäbhiniveçataù  syäd  éçäd  apetasya  viparyayo  ’småtiù.  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  the  only  basis  for  fearlessness.  Therefore,  perfect  practice  is
possible  for  a  person  who  is  Kåñëa  conscious.  And  since  the  ultimate  goal  of
yoga practice is to see the Lord within, a Kåñëa conscious person is already the
best  of  all  yogés.  The  principles  of  the  yoga  system  mentioned  herein  are
different from those of the popular so-called yoga societies.

TEXT  15

YauÅàev& SadaTMaaNa& YaaeGaq iNaYaTaMaaNaSa" )

XaaiNTa& iNavaR<aParMaa& MaTSa&SQaaMaiDaGaC^iTa )) 15 ))

yuïjann evaà sadätmänaà
yogé niyata-mänasaù
çäntià nirväëa-paramäà
mat-saàsthäm adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

yuïjan—practicing; evam—as mentioned above; sadä—constantly;
ätmänam—body, mind and soul; yogé—the mystic transcendentalist;
niyata-mänasaù—with a regulated mind; çäntim—peace;
nirväëa-paramäm—cessation of material existence; mat-saàsthäm—the

spiritual sky (the kingdom of God); adhigacchati—does attain.

TRANSLATION

Thus practicing constant control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic

transcendentalist, his mind regulated, attains to the kingdom of God [or the
abode of Kåñëa] by cessation of material existence.

PURPORT

The ultimate goal in practicing yoga is now clearly explained. Yoga practice
is  not  meant  for  attaining  any  kind  of  material  facility;  it  is  to  enable  the
cessation of all material existence. One who seeks an improvement in health
or aspires after material perfection is no yogé according to Bhagavad-gétä. Nor
does  cessation  of  material  existence  entail  one’s  entering  into  “the  void,”
which  is  only  a  myth.  There  is  no  void  anywhere  within  the  creation  of  the
Lord. Rather, the cessation of material existence enables one to enter into the
spiritual  sky,  the  abode  of  the  Lord.  The  abode  of  the  Lord  is  also  clearly
described  in  the  Bhagavad-gétä  as  that  place  where  there  is  no  need  of  sun,
in  the  spiritual  kingdom  are
moon  or  electricity.  All  the  planets 
self-illuminated  like  the  sun  in  the  material  sky.  The  kingdom  of  God  is
everywhere,  but  the  spiritual  sky  and  the  planets  thereof  are  called  paraà
dhäma, or superior abodes.

stated  herein  by 

A  consummate  yogé,  who  is  perfect  in  understanding  Lord  Kåñëa,  as  is
(mat-cittaù,  mat-paraù,
the  Lord  Himself 
clearly 
mat-sthänam),  can  attain  real  peace  and  can  ultimately  reach  His  supreme
abode, Kåñëaloka, known as Goloka Våndävana. In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.37)
it  is  clearly  stated,  goloka  eva  nivasaty  akhilätma-bhütaù:  the  Lord,  although
residing always in His abode called Goloka, is the all-pervading Brahman and
the localized Paramätmä as well by dint of His superior spiritual energies. No
one  can  reach  the  spiritual  sky  (Vaikuëöha)  or  enter  into  the  Lord’s  eternal
abode  (Goloka  Våndävana)  without  the  proper  understanding  of  Kåñëa  and
His  plenary  expansion  Viñëu.  Therefore  a  person  working  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  the  perfect  yogé,  because  his  mind  is  always  absorbed  in

Kåñëa’s  activities  (sa  vai  manaù  kåñëa-pädäravindayoù).  In  the  Vedas  also
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad  3.8)  we  learn,  tam  eva  viditväti  måtyum  eti:  “One  can
overcome  the  path  of  birth  and  death  only  by  understanding  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.” In other words, perfection of the yoga system
is  the  attainment  of  freedom  from  material  existence  and  not  some  magical
jugglery or gymnastic feats to befool innocent people.

TEXT  16

NaaTYaénTaSTau YaaeGaae_iSTa Na cEk-aNTaMaNaénTa" )

Na caiTaSvPanXaql/SYa JaaGa]Taae NaEv caJauRNa )) 16 ))

näty-açnatas ’tu yogo ’sti
na caikäntam anaçnataù
na cäti-svapna-çélasya
jägrato naiva cärjuna

SYNONYMS

na—never; ati—too much; açnataù—of one who eats; tu—but; yogaù—linking
with the Supreme; asti—there is; na—nor; ca—also; ekäntam—overly;
anaçnataù—abstaining from eating; na—nor; ca—also; ati—too much;
svapna-çélasya—of one who sleeps; jägrataù—or one who keeps night watch
too much; na—not; eva—ever; ca—and; arjuna—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

There is no possibility of one’s becoming a yogé, O Arjuna, if one eats too

much or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough.

PURPORT

Regulation of diet and sleep is recommended herein for the yogés. Too much
eating means eating more than is required to keep the body and soul together.

There is no need for men to eat animals, because there is an ample supply of
grains, vegetables, fruits and milk. Such simple foodstuff is considered to be in
the mode of goodness according to the Bhagavad-gétä. Animal food is for those
in  the  mode  of  ignorance.  Therefore,  those  who  indulge  in  animal  food,
drinking,  smoking  and  eating  food  which  is  not  first  offered  to  Kåñëa  will
suffer  sinful  reactions  because  of  eating  only  polluted  things.  Bhuïjate  te  tv
aghaà  päpä  ye  pacanty  ätma-käraëät.  Anyone  who  eats  for  sense  pleasure,  or
cooks for himself, not offering his food to Kåñëa, eats only sin. One who eats
sin and eats more than is allotted to him cannot execute perfect yoga. It is best
that  one  eat  only  the  remnants  of  foodstuff  offered  to  Kåñëa.  A  person  in
Kåñëa consciousness does not eat anything which is not first offered to Kåñëa.
Therefore,  only  the  Kåñëa  conscious  person  can  attain  perfection  in  yoga
practice. Nor can one who artificially abstains from eating, manufacturing his
own  personal  process  of  fasting,  practice  yoga.  The  Kåñëa  conscious  person
observes fasting as it is recommended in the scriptures. He does not fast or eat
more than is required, and he is thus competent to perform yoga practice. One
who eats more than required will dream very much while sleeping, and he must
consequently sleep more than is required. One should not sleep more than six
hours daily. One who sleeps more than six hours out of twenty-four is certainly
influenced  by  the  mode  of  ignorance.  A  person  in  the  mode  of  ignorance  is
lazy and prone to sleep a great deal. Such a person cannot perform yoga.

TEXT  17

Yau¢-aharivharSYa Yau¢-ceíSYa k-MaRSau )

Yau¢-SvPanavbaeDaSYa YaaeGaae >aviTa du"%ha )) 17 ))

yuktähära-vihärasya
yukta-ceñöasya karmasu
yukta-svapnävabodhasya
yogo bhavati duùkha-hä

SYNONYMS

yukta—regulated; ähära—eating; vihärasya—recreation; yukta—regulated;
ceñöasya—of one who works for maintenance; karmasu—in discharging duties;
yukta—regulated; svapna-avabodhasya—sleep and wakefulness;
yogaù—practice of yoga; bhavati—becomes; duùkha-hä—diminishing pains.

TRANSLATION

He who is regulated in his habits of eating, sleeping, recreation and work can

mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system.

PURPORT

in 

Extravagance 

the  matter  of  eating, 

sleeping,  defending  and
mating—which  are  demands  of  the  body—can  block  advancement  in  the
practice of yoga. As far as eating is concerned, it can be regulated only when
one  is  practiced  to  take  and  accept  prasädam,  sanctified  food.  Lord  Kåñëa  is
offered,  according  to  the  Bhagavad-gétä  (9.26),  vegetables,  flowers,  fruits,
grains,  milk,  etc.  In  this  way,  a  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  becomes
automatically  trained  not  to  accept  food  not  meant  for  human  consumption,
or  not  in  the  category  of  goodness.  As  far  as  sleeping  is  concerned,  a  Kåñëa
conscious  person  is  always  alert  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, and therefore any unnecessary time spent sleeping is considered
a  great  loss.  Avyartha-kälatvam:  [Cc.Madhya  23.18-19]  a  Kåñëa  conscious
person  cannot  bear  to  pass  a  minute  of  his  life  without  being  engaged  in  the
service of the Lord. Therefore, his sleeping is kept to a minimum. His ideal in
this respect is Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, who was always engaged in the service of
Kåñëa and who could not sleep more than two hours a day, and sometimes not
even that. Öhäkura Haridäsa would not even accept prasädam nor even sleep
for  a  moment  without  finishing  his  daily  routine  of  chanting  with  his  beads
three hundred thousand names. As far as work is concerned, a Kåñëa conscious
person does not do anything which is not connected with Kåñëa’s interest, and

thus his work is always regulated and is untainted by sense gratification. Since
there  is  no  question  of  sense  gratification,  there  is  no  material  leisure  for  a
person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  And  because  he  is  regulated  in  all  his  work,
speech,  sleep,  wakefulness  and  all  other  bodily  activities,  there  is  no  material
misery for him.

TEXT  18

Yada iviNaYaTa& ictaMaaTMaNYaevaviTaïTae )

iNaSPa*h" SavRk-aMae>Yaae Yau¢- wTYauCYaTae Tada )) 18 ))

yadä viniyataà cittam
ätmany evävatiñöhate
nispåhaù sarva-kämebhyo
yukta ity ucyate tadä

SYNONYMS

yadä—when; viniyatam—particularly disciplined; cittam—the mind and its
activities; ätmani—in the transcendence; eva—certainly;
avatiñöhate—becomes situated; nispåhaù—devoid of desire; sarva—for all kinds
of; kämebhyaù—material sense gratification; yuktaù—well situated in yoga;
iti—thus; ucyate—is said to be; tadä—at that time.

TRANSLATION

When the yogé, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities and

becomes situated in transcendence—devoid of all material desires—he is said to
be well established in yoga.

PURPORT

The activities of the yogé are distinguished from those of an ordinary person
by his characteristic cessation from all kinds of material desires—of which sex

is the chief. A perfect yogé is so well disciplined in the activities of the mind
that  he  can  no  longer  be  disturbed  by  any  kind  of  material  desire.  This
perfectional  stage  can  automatically  be  attained  by  persons  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, as stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (9.4.18–20):

sa vai manaù kåñëa-pädäravindayor
vacäàsi vaikuëöha-guëänuvarëane
karau harer mandira-märjanädiñu
çrutià cakäräcyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-liìgälaya-darçane dåçau
tad-bhåtya-gätra-sparçe ’ìga-saìgamam
ghräëaà ca tat-päda-saroja-saurabhe
çrémat-tulasyä rasanäà tad-arpite

pädau hareù kñetra-padänusarpaëe
çiro håñékeça-padäbhivandane
kämaà ca däsye na tu käma-kämyayä
yathottama-çloka-janäçrayä ratiù

“King  Ambaréña  first  of  all  engaged  his  mind  on  the  lotus  feet  of  Lord
Kåñëa;  then,  one  after  another,  he  engaged  his  words  in  describing  the
transcendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the temple of the
Lord,  his  ears  in  hearing  of  the  activities  of  the  Lord,  his  eyes  in  seeing  the
transcendental  forms  of  the  Lord,  his  body  in  touching  the  bodies  of  the
devotees, his sense of smell in smelling the scents of the lotus flowers offered to
the  Lord,  his  tongue  in  tasting  the  tulasé  leaf  offered  at  the  lotus  feet  of  the
Lord, his legs in going to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord, his
head  in  offering  obeisances  unto  the  Lord,  and  his  desires  in  executing  the
mission  of  the  Lord.  All  these  transcendental  activities  are  quite  befitting  a
pure devotee.”

This transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by the followers
of the impersonalist path, but it becomes very easy and practical for a person
in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  as  is  apparent  in  the  above  description  of  the
engagements of Mahäräja Ambaréña. Unless the mind is fixed on the lotus feet

of  the  Lord  by  constant  remembrance,  such  transcendental  engagements  are
not practical. In the devotional service of the Lord, therefore, these prescribed
activities  are  called  arcana,  or  engaging  all  the  senses  in  the  service  of  the
Lord. The senses and the mind require engagements. Simple abnegation is not
practical. Therefore, for people in general—especially those who are not in the
renounced  order  of  life—transcendental  engagement  of  the  senses  and  the
mind as described above is the perfect process for transcendental achievement,
which is called yukta in the Bhagavad-gétä.

TEXT  19

YaQaa dqPaae iNavaTaSQaae Nae®Tae SaaePaMaa SMa*Taa )

YaaeiGaNaae YaTaictaSYa YauÅTaae YaaeGaMaaTMaNa" )) 19 ))

yathä dépo niväta-stho
neìgate sopamä småtä
yogino yata-cittasya
yuïjato yogam ätmanaù

SYNONYMS

yathä—as; dépaù—a lamp; niväta-sthaù—in a place without wind; na—does
not; iìgate—waver; sä—this; upamä—comparison; småtä—is considered;
yoginaù—of the yogé; yata-cittasya—whose mind is controlled;
yuïjataù—constantly engaged; yogam—in meditation; ätmanaù—on
transcendence.

TRANSLATION

As a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist,
whose mind is controlled, remains always steady in his meditation on the
transcendent self.

PURPORT

A  truly  Kåñëa  conscious  person,  always  absorbed  in  transcendence,  in
constant  undisturbed  meditation  on  his  worshipable  Lord,  is  as  steady  as  a
lamp in a windless place.

TEXTS  20–23

Ya}aaeParMaTae icta& iNaåÖ& YaaeGaSaevYaa )

Ya}a cEvaTMaNaaTMaaNa& PaXYaàaTMaiNa TauZYaiTa )) 20 ))

Sau%MaaTYaiNTak&- Yatad(buiÖGa]aùMaTaqiNd]YaMa( )

veita Ya}a Na cEvaYa& iSQaTaêl/iTa TatvTa" )) 21 ))

Ya& l/Bßa caPar& l/a>a& MaNYaTae NaaiDak&- TaTa" )

YaiSMaiNSQaTaae Na du"%eNa Gauå<aaiPa ivcaLYaTae )) 22 ))

Ta& ivÛaÕu"%Sa&YaaeGaivYaaeGa& YaaeGaSa&ijTaMa( )) 23 ))

yatroparamate cittaà
niruddhaà yoga-sevayä
yatra caivätmanätmänaà
paçyann ätmani tuñyati

sukham ätyantikaà yat tad
buddhi-grähyam aténdriyam
vetti yatra na caiväyaà
sthitaç calati tattvataù

yaà labdhvä cäparaà läbhaà
manyate nädhikaà tataù
yasmin sthito na duùkhena
guruëäpi vicälyate

taà vidyäd duùkha-saàyoga-
viyogaà yoga-saàjïitam

SYNONYMS

yatra—in that state of affairs where; uparamate—cease (because one feels
transcendental happiness); cittam—mental activities; niruddham—being
restrained from matter; yoga-sevayä—by performance of yoga; yatra—in
which; ca—also; eva—certainly; ätmanä—by the pure mind; ätmänam—the
self; paçyan—realizing the position of; ätmani—in the self; tuñyati—one
becomes satisfied; sukham—happiness; ätyantikam—supreme; yat—which;
tat—that; buddhi—by intelligence; grähyam—accessible;
aténdriyam—transcendental; vetti—one knows; yatra—wherein; na—never;
ca—also; eva—certainly; ayam—he; sthitaù—situated; calati—moves;
tattvataù—from the truth; yam—that which; labdhvä—by attainment;
ca—also; aparam—any other; läbham—gain; manyate—considers; na—never;
adhikam—more; tataù—than that; yasmin—in which; sthitaù—being situated;
na—never; duùkhena—by miseries; guruëä api—even though very difficult;
vicälyate—becomes shaken; tam—that; vidyät—you must know;
duùkha-saàyoga—of the miseries of material contact;
viyogam—extermination; yoga-saàjïitam—called trance in yoga.

TRANSLATION

In the stage of perfection called trance, or samädhi, one’s mind is completely
restrained from material mental activities by practice of yoga. This perfection is
characterized by one’s ability to see the self by the pure mind and to relish and
rejoice in the self. In that joyous state, one is situated in boundless
transcendental happiness, realized through transcendental senses. Established
thus, one never departs from the truth, and upon gaining this he thinks there is
no greater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken, even in
the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedom from all miseries
arising from material contact.

PURPORT

By practice of yoga one becomes gradually detached from material concepts.
This  is  the  primary  characteristic  of  the  yoga  principle.  And  after  this,  one
becomes situated in trance, or samädhi, which means that the yogé realizes the
Supersoul  through  transcendental  mind  and  intelligence,  without  any  of  the
misgivings of identifying the self with the Superself. Yoga practice is more or
less  based  on  the  principles  of  the  Pataïjali  system.  Some  unauthorized
commentators  try  to  identify  the  individual  soul  with  the  Supersoul,  and  the
monists  think  this  to  be  liberation,  but  they  do  not  understand  the  real
purpose  of  the  Pataïjali  system  of  yoga.  There  is  an  acceptance  of
transcendental pleasure in the Pataïjali system, but the monists do not accept
this transcendental pleasure, out of fear of jeopardizing the theory of oneness.
The duality of knowledge and knower is not accepted by the nondualist, but in
this  verse 
transcendental
senses—is  accepted.  And  this  is  corroborated  by  Pataïjali  Muni,  the  famous
exponent of the yoga system. The great sage declares in his Yoga-sütras (3.34):
puruñärtha-çünyänäà  guëänäà  pratiprasavaù  kaivalyaà  svarüpa-pratiñöhä  vä
citi-çaktir iti.

transcendental  pleasure—realized 

through 

This  citi-çakti,  or  internal  potency,  is  transcendental.  Puruñärtha  means
material religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and, at the end,
the  attempt  to  become  one  with  the  Supreme.  This  “oneness  with  the
Supreme”  is  called  kaivalyam  by  the  monist.  But  according  to  Pataïjali,  this
kaivalyam is an internal, or transcendental, potency by which the living entity
becomes  aware  of  his  constitutional  position.  In  the  words  of  Lord  Caitanya,
this  state  of  affairs  is  called  ceto-darpaëa-märjanam  [Cc.  Antya  20.12],  or
clearance  of  the  impure  mirror  of  the  mind.  This  “clearance”  is  actually
liberation,  or  bhava-mahä-dävägni-nirväpaëam.  The  theory  of  nirväëa—also
preliminary—corresponds with this principle. In the Bhägavatam (2.10.6) this
is called svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù. The Bhagavad-gétä also confirms this situation
in this verse.

After nirväëa, or material cessation, there is the manifestation of spiritual
activities, or devotional service to the Lord, known as Kåñëa consciousness. In
the words of the Bhägavatam, svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù: this is the “real life of the
living entity.” Mäyä, or illusion, is the condition of spiritual life contaminated

by  material  infection.  Liberation  from  this  material  infection  does  not  mean
destruction of the original eternal position of the living entity. Pataïjali also
accepts  this  by  his  words  kaivalyaà  svarüpa-pratiñöhä  vä  citi-çaktir  iti.  This
citi-çakti,  or  transcendental  pleasure,  is  real  life.  This  is  confirmed  in  the
Vedänta-sütra  (1.1.12)  as  änanda-mayo  ’bhyäsät.  This  natural  transcendental
pleasure  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  yoga  and  is  easily  achieved  by  execution  of
devotional service, or bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga will be vividly described in the
Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä.

In  the  yoga  system,  as  described  in  this  chapter,  there  are  two  kinds  of
samädhi,  called  samprajïäta-samädhi  and  asamprajïäta-samädhi.  When  one
becomes  situated  in  the  transcendental  position  by  various  philosophical
researches,  he  is  said  to  have  achieved  samprajïäta-samädhi.  In  the
asamprajïäta-samädhi  there  is  no  longer  any  connection  with  mundane
pleasure, for one is then transcendental to all sorts of happiness derived from
the senses. When the yogé is once situated in that transcendental position, he
is  never  shaken  from  it.  Unless  the  yogé  is  able  to  reach  this  position,  he  is
unsuccessful.  Today’s  so-called  yoga  practice,  which  involves  various  sense
pleasures,  is  contradictory.  A  yogé  indulging  in  sex  and  intoxication  is  a
mockery. Even those yogés who are attracted by the siddhis (perfections) in the
process  of  yoga  are  not  perfectly  situated.  If  yogés  are  attracted  by  the
by-products  of  yoga,  then  they  cannot  attain  the  stage  of  perfection,  as  is
stated in this verse. Persons, therefore, indulging in the make-show practice of
gymnastic feats or siddhis should know that the aim of yoga is lost in that way.

The  best  practice  of  yoga  in  this  age  is  Kåñëa  consciousness,  which  is  not
baffling. A Kåñëa conscious person is so happy in his occupation that he does
not aspire after any other happiness. There are many impediments, especially
in this age of hypocrisy, to practicing haöha-yoga, dhyäna-yoga and jïäna-yoga,
but there is no such problem in executing karma-yoga or bhakti-yoga.

As  long  as  the  material  body  exists,  one  has  to  meet  the  demands  of  the
body,  namely  eating,  sleeping,  defending  and  mating.  But  a  person  who  is  in
pure  bhakti-yoga,  or  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  does  not  arouse  the  senses  while
meeting  the  demands  of  the  body.  Rather,  he  accepts  the  bare  necessities  of
life, making the best use of a bad bargain, and enjoys transcendental happiness

in Kåñëa consciousness. He is callous toward incidental occurrences—such as
accidents, disease, scarcity and even the death of a most dear relative—but he
is  always  alert  to  execute  his  duties  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  or  bhakti-yoga.
Accidents  never  deviate  him  from  his  duty.  As  stated  in  the Bhagavad-gétä
(2.14),  ägamäpäyino  ’nityäs  täàs  titikñasva  bhärata.  He  endures  all  such
incidental  occurrences  because  he  knows  that  they  come  and  go  and  do  not
affect  his  duties.  In  this  way  he  achieves  the  highest  perfection  in  yoga
practice.

TEXT  24

Sa iNaêYaeNa Yaae¢-VYaae YaaeGaae_iNaivR<aceTaSaa )

SaªLPaPa[>avaNk-aMaa&STYa¤-a SavaRNaXaezTa" )

MaNaSaEveiNd]YaGa]aMa& iviNaYaMYa SaMaNTaTa" )) 24 ))

sa niçcayena yoktavyo
yogo ’nirviëëa-cetasä
saìkalpa-prabhavän kämäàs
tyaktvä sarvän açeñataù
manasaivendriya-grämaà
viniyamya samantataù

SYNONYMS

saù—that; niçcayena—with firm determination; yoktavyaù—must be
practiced; yogaù—yoga system; anirviëëa-cetasä—without deviation;
saìkalpa—mental speculations; prabhavän—born of; kämän—material desires;
tyaktvä—giving up; sarvän—all; açeñataù—completely; manasä—by the mind;
eva—certainly; indriya-grämam—the full set of senses; viniyamya—regulating;
samantataù—from all sides.

TRANSLATION

One should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with determination and

faith and not be deviated from the path. One should abandon, without
exception, all material desires born of mental speculation and thus control all
the senses on all sides by the mind.

PURPORT

The yoga practitioner should be determined and should patiently prosecute
the practice without deviation. One should be sure of success at the end and
pursue this course with great perseverance, not becoming discouraged if there
is  any  delay  in  the  attainment  of  success.  Success  is  sure  for  the  rigid
practitioner. Regarding bhakti-yoga, Rüpa Gosvämé says:

utsähän niçcayäd dhairyät
tat-tat-karma-pravartanät
saìga-tyägät sato våtteù
ñaòbhir bhaktiù prasidhyati

“One  can  execute  the  process  of  bhakti-yoga  successfully  with  full-hearted
enthusiasm,  perseverance,  and  determination,  by  following  the  prescribed
duties in the association of devotees and by engaging completely in activities
of goodness.” (Upadeçämåta 3)

As  for  determination,  one  should  follow  the  example  of  the  sparrow  who
lost her eggs in the waves of the ocean. A sparrow laid her eggs on the shore of
the ocean, but the big ocean carried away the eggs on its waves. The sparrow
became very upset and asked the ocean to return her eggs. The ocean did not
even  consider  her  appeal.  So  the  sparrow  decided  to  dry  up  the  ocean.  She
began to pick out the water in her small beak, and everyone laughed at her for
her  impossible  determination.  The  news  of  her  activity  spread,  and  at  last
Garuòa,  the  gigantic  bird  carrier  of  Lord  Viñëu,  heard  it.  He  became
compassionate toward his small sister bird, and so he came to see the sparrow.
Garuòa  was  very  pleased  by  the  determination  of  the  small  sparrow,  and  he
promised to help. Thus Garuòa at once asked the ocean to return her eggs lest
he himself take up the work of the sparrow. The ocean was frightened at this,
and returned the eggs. Thus the sparrow became happy by the grace of Garuòa.

Similarly, 

the  practice  of  yoga,  especially  bhakti-yoga 

in  Kåñëa
consciousness, may appear to be a very difficult job. But if anyone follows the
principles  with  great  determination,  the  Lord  will  surely  help,  for  God  helps
those who help themselves.

TEXT  25

XaNaE" XaNaEåParMaed(buÖya Da*iTaGa*hqTaYaa )

AaTMaSa&SQa& MaNa" k*-Tva Na ik-iÄdiPa icNTaYaeTa( )) 25 ))

çanaiù çanair uparamed
buddhyä dhåti-gåhétayä
ätma-saàsthaà manaù kåtvä
na kiïcid api cintayet

SYNONYMS

çanaiù—gradually; çanaiù—step by step; uparamet—one should hold back;
buddhyä—by intelligence; dhåti-gåhétayä—carried by conviction;
ätma-saàstham—placed in transcendence; manaù—mind; kåtvä—making;
na—not; kiïcit—anything else; api—even; cintayet—should think of.

TRANSLATION

Gradually, step by step, one should become situated in trance by means of
intelligence sustained by full conviction, and thus the mind should be fixed on
the self alone and should think of nothing else.

PURPORT

By  proper  conviction  and  intelligence  one  should  gradually  cease  sense
activities. This is called pratyähära. The mind, being controlled by conviction,
meditation,  and  cessation  from  the  senses,  should  be  situated  in  trance,  or
samädhi.  At  that  time  there  is  no  longer  any  danger  of  becoming  engaged  in

the material conception of life. In other words, although one is involved with
matter  as  long  as  the  material  body  exists,  one  should  not  think  about  sense
gratification.  One  should  think  of  no  pleasure  aside  from  the  pleasure  of  the
Supreme  Self.  This  state  is  easily  attained  by  directly  practicing  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  26

YaTaae YaTaae iNaêl/iTa MaNaêÄl/MaiSQarMa( )

TaTaSTaTaae iNaYaMYaETadaTMaNYaev vXa& NaYaeTa( )) 26 ))

yato yato niçcalati
manaç caïcalam asthiram
tatas tato niyamyaitad
ätmany eva vaçaà nayet

SYNONYMS

yataù yataù—wherever; niçcalati—becomes verily agitated; manaù—the mind;
caïcalam—flickering; asthiram—unsteady; tataù tataù—from there;
niyamya—regulating; etat—this; ätmani—in the self; eva—certainly;
vaçam—control; nayet—must bring under.

TRANSLATION

From wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and unsteady nature,
one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back under the control of the self.

PURPORT

The  nature  of  the  mind  is  flickering  and  unsteady.  But  a  self-realized  yogé
has to control the mind; the mind should not control him. One who controls
the mind (and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvämé, or svämé, and one
who is controlled by the mind is called go-däsa, or the servant of the senses. A

gosvämé  knows  the  standard  of  sense  happiness.  In  transcendental  sense
happiness,  the  senses  are  engaged  in  the  service  of  Håñékeça,  or  the  supreme
owner of the senses—Kåñëa. Serving Kåñëa with purified senses is called Kåñëa
consciousness. That is the way of bringing the senses under full control. What
is more, that is the highest perfection of yoga practice.

TEXT

 27

Pa[XaaNTaMaNaSa& ùeNa& YaaeiGaNa& Sau%MautaMaMa( )

oPaEiTa XaaNTarJaSa& b]ø>aUTaMak-LMazMa( )) 27 ))

praçänta-manasaà hy enaà
yoginaà sukham uttamam
upaiti çänta-rajasaà
brahma-bhütam akalmañam

SYNONYMS

praçänta—peaceful, fixed on the lotus feet of Kåñëa; manasam—whose mind;
hi—certainly; enam—this; yoginam—yogé; sukham—happiness; uttamam—the
highest; upaiti—attains; çänta-rajasam—his passion pacified;
brahma-bhütam—liberation by identification with the Absolute;
akalmañam—freed from all past sinful reactions.

TRANSLATION

The yogé whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest perfection of

transcendental happiness. He is beyond the mode of passion, he realizes his
qualitative identity with the Supreme, and thus he is freed from all reactions to
past deeds.

PURPORT

Brahma-bhüta  is  the  state  of  being  free  from  material  contamination  and

situated in the transcendental service of the Lord. Mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
(Bg. 18.54). One cannot remain in the quality of Brahman, the Absolute, until
lotus  feet  of  the  Lord.  Sa  vai  manaù
one’s  mind  is  fixed  on  the 
kåñëa-pädäravindayoù.  To  be  always  engaged  in  the  transcendental  loving
service  of  the  Lord,  or  to  remain  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  is  to  be  factually
liberated from the mode of passion and all material contamination.

TEXT  28

YauÅàev& SadaTMaaNa& YaaeGaq ivGaTak-LMaz" )

Sau%eNa b]øSa&SPaXaRMaTYaNTa& Sau%MaénuTae )) 28 ))

yuïjann evaà sadätmänaà
yogé vigata-kalmañaù
sukhena brahma-saàsparçam
atyantaà sukham açnute

SYNONYMS

yuïjan—engaging in yoga practice; evam—thus; sadä—always; ätmänam—the
self; yogé—one who is in touch with the Supreme Self; vigata—freed from;
kalmañaù—all material contamination; sukhena—in transcendental happiness;
brahma-saàsparçam—being in constant touch with the Supreme;
atyantam—the highest; sukham—happiness; açnute—attains.

TRANSLATION

Thus the self-controlled yogé, constantly engaged in yoga practice, becomes

free from all material contamination and achieves the highest stage of perfect
happiness in transcendental loving service to the Lord.

PURPORT

Self-realization means knowing one’s constitutional position in relationship

to the Supreme. The individual soul is part and parcel of the Supreme, and his
position  is  to  render  transcendental  service  to  the  Lord.  This  transcendental
contact with the Supreme is called brahma-saàsparça.

TEXT  29

SavR>aUTaSQaMaaTMaaNa& SavR>aUTaaiNa caTMaiNa )

wR+aTae YaaeGaYau¢-aTMaa SavR}a SaMadXaRNa" )) 29 ))

sarva-bhüta-stham ätmänaà
sarva-bhütäni cätmani
ékñate yoga-yuktätmä
sarvatra sama-darçanaù

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhüta-stham—situated in all beings; ätmänam—the Supersoul;
sarva—all; bhütäni—entities; ca—also; ätmani—in the self; ékñate—does see;
yoga-yukta-ätmä—one who is dovetailed in Kåñëa consciousness;
sarvatra—everywhere; sama-darçanaù—seeing equally.

TRANSLATION

A true yogé observes Me in all beings and also sees every being in Me.
Indeed, the self-realized person sees Me, the same Supreme Lord, everywhere.

PURPORT

A  Kåñëa  conscious  yogé  is  the  perfect  seer  because  he  sees  Kåñëa,  the
Supreme,  situated  in  everyone’s  heart  as  Supersoul  (Paramätmä).  Éçvaraù
sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe ’rjuna tiñöhati. The Lord in His Paramätmä feature is
situated within both the heart of the dog and that of a brähmaëa. The perfect
yogé  knows  that  the  Lord  is  eternally  transcendental  and  is  not  materially
affected  by  His  presence  in  either  a  dog  or  a  brähmaëa.  That  is  the  supreme

neutrality  of  the  Lord.  The  individual  soul  is  also  situated  in  the  individual
heart, but he is not present in all hearts. That is the distinction between the
individual soul and the Supersoul. One who is not factually in the practice of
yoga  cannot  see  so  clearly.  A  Kåñëa  conscious  person  can  see  Kåñëa  in  the
heart of both the believer and the nonbeliever. In the småti this is confirmed
as follows: ätatatväc ca mätåtväc ca ätmä hi paramo hariù. The Lord, being the
source  of  all  beings,  is  like  the  mother  and  the  maintainer.  As  the  mother  is
neutral  to  all  different  kinds  of  children,  the  supreme  father  (or  mother)  is
also. Consequently the Supersoul is always in every living being.

Outwardly, also, every living being is situated in the energy of the Lord. As
will  be  explained  in  the  Seventh  Chapter,  the  Lord  has,  primarily,  two
energies—the spiritual (or superior) and the material (or inferior). The living
entity,  although  part  of  the  superior  energy,  is  conditioned  by  the  inferior
energy;  the  living  entity  is  always  in  the  Lord’s  energy.  Every  living  entity  is
situated in Him in one way or another.

The  yogé  sees  equally  because  he  sees  that  all  living  entities,  although  in
different  situations  according  to  the  results  of  fruitive  work,  in  all
circumstances remain the servants of God. While in the material energy, the
living entity serves the material senses; and while in spiritual energy, he serves
the  Supreme  Lord  directly.  In  either  case  the  living  entity  is  the  servant  of
God. This vision of equality is perfect in a person in Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  30

Yaae Maa& PaXYaiTa SavR}a Sav| c MaiYa PaXYaiTa )

TaSYaah& Na Pa[<aXYaaiMa Sa c Mae Na Pa[<aXYaiTa )) 30 ))

yo mäà paçyati sarvatra
sarvaà ca mayi paçyati
tasyähaà na praëaçyämi
sa ca me na praëaçyati

SYNONYMS

yaù—whoever; mäm—Me; paçyati—sees; sarvatra—everywhere;
sarvam—everything; ca—and; mayi—in Me; paçyati—sees; tasya—for him;
aham—I; na—not; praëaçyämi—am lost; saù—he; ca—also; me—to Me;
na—nor; praëaçyati—is lost.

TRANSLATION

For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never lost,

nor is he ever lost to Me.

PURPORT

A person in Kåñëa consciousness certainly sees Lord Kåñëa everywhere, and
he  sees  everything  in  Kåñëa.  Such  a  person  may  appear  to  see  all  separate
manifestations  of  the  material  nature,  but  in  each  and  every  instance  he  is
conscious  of  Kåñëa,  knowing  that  everything  is  a  manifestation  of  Kåñëa’s
energy.  Nothing  can  exist  without  Kåñëa,  and  Kåñëa  is  the  Lord  of
everything—this  is  the  basic  principle  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Kåñëa
consciousness is the development of love of Kåñëa—a position transcendental
even  to  material  liberation.  At  this  stage  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  beyond
self-realization,  the  devotee  becomes  one  with  Kåñëa  in  the  sense  that  Kåñëa
becomes  everything  for  the  devotee  and  the  devotee  becomes  full  in  loving
Kåñëa. An intimate relationship between the Lord and the devotee then exists.
In that stage, the living entity can never be annihilated, nor is the Personality
of Godhead ever out of the sight of the devotee. To merge in Kåñëa is spiritual
annihilation. A devotee takes no such risk. It is stated in the Brahma-saàhitä
(5.38):

premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi

“I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee
whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form
of Çyämasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee.”

At  this  stage,  Lord  Kåñëa  never  disappears  from  the  sight  of  the  devotee,
nor does the devotee ever lose sight of the Lord. In the case of a yogé who sees
the  Lord  as  Paramätmä  within  the  heart,  the  same  applies.  Such  a  yogé  turns
into a pure devotee and cannot bear to live for a moment without seeing the
Lord within himself.

TEXT  31

SavR>aUTaiSQaTa& Yaae Maa& >aJaTYaek-TvMaaiSQaTa" )

SavRQaa vTaRMaaNaae_iPa Sa YaaeGaq MaiYa vTaRTae )) 31 ))

sarva-bhüta-sthitaà yo mäà
bhajaty ekatvam ästhitaù
sarvathä vartamäno ’pi
sa yogé mayi vartate

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhüta-sthitam—situated in everyone’s heart; yaù—he who; mäm—Me;
bhajati—serves in devotional service; ekatvam—in oneness; ästhitaù—situated;
sarvathä—in all respects; varta-mänaù—being situated; api—in spite of;
saù—he; yogé—the transcendentalist; mayi—in Me; vartate—remains.

TRANSLATION

Such a yogé, who engages in the worshipful service of the Supersoul,

knowing that I and the Supersoul are one, remains always in Me in all
circumstances.

PURPORT

A  yogé  who  is  practicing  meditation  on  the  Supersoul  sees  within  himself
the plenary portion of Kåñëa as Viñëu—with four hands, holding conchshell,
wheel, club and lotus flower. The yogé should know that Viñëu is not different
from  Kåñëa.  Kåñëa  in  this  form  of  Supersoul  is  situated  in  everyone’s  heart.
Furthermore,  there  is  no  difference  between  the  innumerable  Supersouls
present in the innumerable hearts of living entities. Nor is there a difference
between a Kåñëa conscious person always engaged in the transcendental loving
service  of  Kåñëa  and  a  perfect  yogé  engaged  in  meditation  on  the  Supersoul.
The yogé in Kåñëa consciousness—even though he may be engaged in various
activities while in material existence—remains always situated in Kåñëa. This
is  confirmed  in  the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu  (1.2.187)  of  Çréla  Rüpa  Gosvämé:
nikhiläsv  apy  avasthäsu  jévan-muktaù  sa  ucyate. A devotee of the Lord, always
acting 
the
Närada-païcarätra this is confirmed in this way:

in  Kåñëa  consciousness, 

is  automatically 

liberated. 

In 

dik-kälädy-anavacchinne
kåñëe ceto vidhäya ca
tan-mayo bhavati kñipraà
jévo brahmaëi yojayet

“By  concentrating  one’s  attention  on  the  transcendental  form  of  Kåñëa,
who  is  all-pervading  and  beyond  time  and  space,  one  becomes  absorbed  in
thinking  of  Kåñëa  and  then  attains  the  happy  state  of  transcendental
association with Him.”

Kåñëa  consciousness  is  the  highest  stage  of  trance  in  yoga  practice.  This
very  understanding  that  Kåñëa  is  present  as  Paramätmä  in  everyone’s  heart
makes the yogé faultless. The Vedas (Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad 1.21) confirm this
inconceivable  potency  of  the  Lord  as  follows:  eko  ’pi  san  bahudhä  yo  ’vabhäti.
“Although  the  Lord  is  one,  He  is  present  in  innumerable  hearts  as  many.”
Similarly, in the småti-çästra it is said:

eka eva paro viñëuù
sarva-vyäpé na saàçayaù
aiçvaryäd rüpam ekaà ca

sürya-vat bahudheyate

“Viñëu  is  one,  and  yet  He  is  certainly  all-pervading.  By  His  inconceivable
potency, in spite of His one form, He is present everywhere, as the sun appears
in many places at once.”

TEXT  32

AaTMaaEPaMYaeNa SavR}a SaMa& PaXYaiTa Yaae_JauRNa )

Sau%& va Yaid va du"%& Sa YaaeGaq ParMaae MaTa" )) 32 ))

ätmaupamyena sarvatra
samaà paçyati yo ’rjuna
sukhaà vä yadi vä duùkhaà
sa yogé paramo mataù

SYNONYMS

ätma—with his self; aupamyena—by comparison; sarvatra—everywhere;
samam—equally; paçyati—sees; yaù—he who; arjuna—O Arjuna;
sukham—happiness; vä—or; yadi—if; vä—or; duùkham—distress; saù—such;
yogé—a transcendentalist; paramaù—perfect; mataù—is considered.

TRANSLATION

He is a perfect yogé who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true
equality of all beings, in both their happiness and their distress, O Arjuna!

PURPORT

One  who  is  Kåñëa  conscious  is  a  perfect  yogé;  he  is  aware  of  everyone’s
happiness and distress by dint of his own personal experience. The cause of the
distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of his relationship with God. And the
cause  of  happiness  is  knowing  Kåñëa  to  be  the  supreme  enjoyer  of  all  the
activities of the human being, the proprietor of all lands and planets, and the

sincerest  friend  of  all  living  entities.  The  perfect  yogé  knows  that  the  living
being who is conditioned by the modes of material nature is subjected to the
threefold material miseries due to forgetfulness of his relationship with Kåñëa.
And  because  one  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  happy,  he  tries  to  distribute  the
knowledge  of  Kåñëa  everywhere.  Since  the  perfect  yogé  tries  to  broadcast  the
importance of becoming Kåñëa conscious, he is the best philanthropist in the
world,  and  he  is  the  dearest  servitor  of  the  Lord.  Na  ca  tasmän  manuñyeñu
kaçcin  me  priya-kåttamaù  (Bg.  18.69).  In  other  words,  a  devotee  of  the  Lord
always looks to the welfare of all living entities, and in this way he is factually
the  friend  of  everyone.  He  is  the  best  yogé  because  he  does  not  desire
perfection  in  yoga  for  his  personal  benefit,  but  tries  for  others  also.  He  does
not envy his fellow living entities. Here is a contrast between a pure devotee of
the Lord and a yogé interested only in his personal elevation. The yogé who has
withdrawn  to  a  secluded  place  in  order  to  meditate  perfectly  may  not  be  as
perfect  as  a  devotee  who  is  trying  his  best  to  turn  every  man  toward  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  33

AJauRNa ovac

Yaae_Ya& YaaeGaSTvYaa Pa[ae¢-" SaaMYaeNa MaDauSaUdNa )

WTaSYaah& Na PaXYaaiMa cÄl/TvaiTSQaiTa& iSQaraMa( )) 33 ))

arjuna uväca
yo ’yaà yogas tvayä proktaù
sämyena madhusüdana
etasyähaà na paçyämi
caïcalatvät sthitià sthiräm

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; yaù ayam—this system; yogaù—mysticism;
tvayä—by You; proktaù—described; sämyena—generally; madhu-südana—O

killer of the demon Madhu; etasya—of this; aham—I; na—do not;
paçyämi—see; caïcalatvät—due to being restless; sthitim—situation;
sthiräm—stable.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Madhusüdana, the system of yoga which You have

summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is restless
and unsteady.

PURPORT

The system of mysticism described by Lord Kåñëa to Arjuna beginning with
the  words  çucau  deçe  and  ending  with  yogé  paramaù  is  here  being  rejected  by
Arjuna  out  of  a  feeling  of  inability.  It  is  not  possible  for  an  ordinary  man  to
leave home and go to a secluded place in the mountains or jungles to practice
yoga in this Age of Kali. The present age is characterized by a bitter struggle
for a life of short duration. People are not serious about self-realization even by
simple, practical means, and what to speak of this difficult yoga system, which
regulates  the  mode  of  living,  the  manner  of  sitting,  selection  of  place,  and
detachment  of  the  mind  from  material  engagements.  As  a  practical  man,
Arjuna thought it was impossible to follow this system of yoga, even though he
was favorably endowed in many ways. He belonged to the royal family and was
highly elevated in terms of numerous qualities; he was a great warrior, he had
great longevity, and, above all, he was the most intimate friend of Lord Kåñëa,
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Five  thousand  years  ago,  Arjuna  had
much better facilities than we do now, yet he refused to accept this system of
yoga.  In  fact,  we  do  not  find  any  record  in  history  of  his  practicing  it  at  any
time.  Therefore  this  system  must  be  considered  generally  impossible  in  this
Age of Kali. Of course it may be possible for some very few, rare men, but for
the people in general it is an impossible proposal. If this were so five thousand
years  ago,  then  what  of  the  present  day?  Those  who  are  imitating  this  yoga
system  in  different  so-called  schools  and  societies,  although  complacent,  are
certainly wasting their time. They are completely in ignorance of the desired

goal.

TEXT  34

cÄl&/ ih MaNa" k*-Z<a Pa[MaaiQa bl/vÕ*!Ma( )

TaSYaah& iNaGa]h& MaNYae vaYaaeirv SauduZk-rMa( )) 34 ))

caïcalaà hi manaù kåñëa
pramäthi balavad dåòham
tasyähaà nigrahaà manye
väyor iva su-duñkaram

SYNONYMS

caïcalam—flickering; hi—certainly; manaù—mind; kåñëa—O Kåñëa;
pramäthi—agitating; bala-vat—strong; dåòham—obstinate; tasya—its;
aham—I; nigraham—subduing; manye—think; väyoù—of the wind; iva—like;
su-duñkaram—difficult.

TRANSLATION

For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Kåñëa, and

to subdue it, I think, is more difficult than controlling the wind.

PURPORT

The  mind  is  so  strong  and  obstinate  that  it  sometimes  overcomes  the
intelligence,  although  the  mind  is  supposed  to  be  subservient  to  the
intelligence.  For  a  man  in  the  practical  world  who  has  to  fight  so  many
opposing  elements,  it  is  certainly  very  difficult  to  control  the  mind.
Artificially,  one  may  establish  a  mental  equilibrium  toward  both  friend  and
enemy, but ultimately no worldly man can do so, for this is more difficult than
controlling the raging wind. In the Vedic literature (Kaöha Upaniñad 1.3.3–4)
it is said:

ätmänaà rathinaà viddhi
çaréraà ratham eva ca
buddhià tu särathià viddhi
manaù pragraham eva ca

indriyäëi hayän ähur
viñayäàs teñu gocarän
ätmendriya-mano-yuktaà
bhoktety ähur manéñiëaù

“The  individual  is  the  passenger  in  the  car  of  the  material  body,  and
intelligence  is  the  driver.  Mind  is  the  driving  instrument,  and  the  senses  are
the  horses.  The  self  is  thus  the  enjoyer  or  sufferer  in  the  association  of  the
mind  and  senses.  So  it  is  understood  by  great  thinkers.”  Intelligence  is
supposed  to  direct  the  mind,  but  the  mind  is  so  strong  and  obstinate  that  it
often overcomes even one’s own intelligence, as an acute infection may surpass
the  efficacy  of  medicine.  Such  a  strong  mind  is  supposed  to  be  controlled  by
the  practice  of  yoga, but such practice is never practical for a worldly person
like  Arjuna.  And  what  can  we  say  of  modern  man?  The  simile  used  here  is
appropriate:  one  cannot  capture  the  blowing  wind.  And  it  is  even  more
difficult to capture the turbulent mind. The easiest way to control the mind, as
suggested  by  Lord  Caitanya,  is  chanting  “Hare  Kåñëa,”  the  great  mantra  for
deliverance,  in  all  humility.  The  method  prescribed  is  sa  vai  manaù
kåñëa-pädäravindayoù: one must engage one’s mind fully in Kåñëa. Only then
will there remain no other engagements to agitate the mind.

TEXT  35

é[q>aGavaNauvac

ASa&XaYa& Mahabahae MaNaae duiNaRGa]h& cl/Ma( )

A>YaaSaeNa Tau k-aENTaeYa vEraGYae<a c Ga*ùTae )) 35 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca

asaàçayaà mahä-bäho
mano durnigrahaà calam
abhyäsena tu kaunteya
vairägyeëa ca gåhyate

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said;
asaàçayam—undoubtedly; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one; manaù—the
mind; durnigraham—difficult to curb; calam—flickering; abhyäsena—by
practice; tu—but; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; vairägyeëa—by detachment;
ca—also; gåhyate—can be so controlled.

TRANSLATION

Lord Çré Kåñëa said: O mighty-armed son of Kunté, it is undoubtedly very
difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by suitable practice and by
detachment.

PURPORT

The difficulty of controlling the obstinate mind, as expressed by Arjuna, is
accepted by the Personality of Godhead. But at the same time He suggests that
by practice and detachment it is possible. What is that practice? In the present
age no one can observe the strict rules and regulations of placing oneself in a
sacred  place,  focusing  the  mind  on  the  Supersoul,  restraining  the  senses  and
mind,  observing  celibacy,  remaining  alone,  etc.  By  the  practice  of  Kåñëa
consciousness, however, one engages in nine types of devotional service to the
Lord. The first and foremost of such devotional engagements is hearing about
Kåñëa. This is a very powerful transcendental method for purging the mind of
all  misgivings.  The  more  one  hears  about  Kåñëa,  the  more  one  becomes
enlightened  and  detached  from  everything  that  draws  the  mind  away  from
Kåñëa. By detaching the mind from activities not devoted to the Lord, one can
very  easily  learn  vairägya.  Vairägya  means  detachment  from  matter  and

engagement  of  the  mind  in  spirit.  Impersonal  spiritual  detachment  is  more
difficult  than  attaching  the  mind  to  the  activities  of  Kåñëa.  This  is  practical
because  by  hearing  about  Kåñëa  one  becomes  automatically  attached  to  the
Supreme Spirit. This attachment is called pareçänubhava, spiritual satisfaction.
It is just like the feeling of satisfaction a hungry man has for every morsel of
food he eats. The more one eats while hungry, the more one feels satisfaction
and  strength.  Similarly,  by  discharge  of  devotional  service  one  feels
transcendental  satisfaction  as  the  mind  becomes  detached  from  material
objectives.  It  is  something  like  curing  a  disease  by  expert  treatment  and
appropriate  diet.  Hearing  of  the  transcendental  activities  of  Lord  Kåñëa  is
therefore expert treatment for the mad mind, and eating the foodstuff offered
to Kåñëa is the appropriate diet for the suffering patient. This treatment is the
process of Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  36

ASa&YaTaaTMaNaa YaaeGaae duZPa[aPa wiTa Mae MaiTa" )

vXYaaTMaNaa Tau YaTaTaa XaKYaae_vaáuMauPaaYaTa" )) 36 ))

asaàyatätmanä yogo
duñpräpa iti me matiù
vaçyätmanä tu yatatä
çakyo ’väptum upäyataù

SYNONYMS

asaàyata—unbridled; ätmanä—by the mind; yogaù—self-realization;
duñpräpaù—difficult to obtain; iti—thus; me—My; matiù—opinion;
vaçya—controlled; ätmanä—by the mind; tu—but; yatatä—while
endeavoring; çakyaù—practical; aväptum—to achieve; upäyataù—by
appropriate means.

TRANSLATION

For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work. But he
whose mind is controlled and who strives by appropriate means is assured of
success. That is My opinion.

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  declares  that  one  who  does  not
accept the proper treatment to detach the mind from material engagement can
hardly  achieve  success  in  self-realization.  Trying  to  practice  yoga  while
engaging  the  mind  in  material  enjoyment  is  like  trying  to  ignite  a  fire  while
pouring  water  on  it. Yoga practice without mental control is a waste of time.
Such  a  show  of  yoga  may  be  materially  lucrative,  but  it  is  useless  as  far  as
spiritual  realization  is  concerned.  Therefore,  one  must  control  the  mind  by
engaging it constantly in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Unless
one is engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, he cannot steadily control the mind. A
Kåñëa  conscious  person  easily  achieves  the  result  of  yoga  practice  without
separate  endeavor,  but  a  yoga  practitioner  cannot  achieve  success  without
becoming Kåñëa conscious.

TEXT  37

AJauRNa ovac

AYaiTa" é[ÖYaaePaeTaae YaaeGaaÀil/TaMaaNaSa" )

APa[aPYa YaaeGaSa&iSaiÖ& k-a& GaiTa& k*-Z<a GaC^iTa )) 37 ))

arjuna uväca
ayatiù çraddhayopeto
yogäc calita-mänasaù
apräpya yoga-saàsiddhià
käà gatià kåñëa gacchati

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; ayatiù—the unsuccessful transcendentalist;
çraddhayä—with faith; upetaù—engaged; yogät—from the mystic link;
calita—deviated; mänasaù—who has such a mind; apräpya—failing to attain;
yoga-saàsiddhim—the highest perfection in mysticism; käm—which;
gatim—destination; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; gacchati—achieves.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Kåñëa, what is the destination of the unsuccessful

transcendentalist, who in the beginning takes to the process of self-realization
with faith but who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and thus does not
attain perfection in mysticism?

PURPORT

The path of self-realization or mysticism is described in the Bhagavad-gétä.
The basic principle of self-realization is knowledge that the living entity is not
this material body but that he is different from it and that his happiness is in
eternal life, bliss and knowledge. These are transcendental, beyond both body
and mind. Self-realization is sought by the path of knowledge, by the practice
of the eightfold system or by bhakti-yoga. In each of these processes one has to
realize  the  constitutional  position  of  the  living  entity,  his  relationship  with
God,  and  the  activities  whereby  he  can  reestablish  the  lost  link  and  achieve
the  highest  perfectional  stage  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Following  any  of  the
above-mentioned three methods, one is sure to reach the supreme goal sooner
or  later.  This  was  asserted  by  the  Lord  in  the  Second  Chapter:  even  a  little
endeavor on the transcendental path offers a great hope for deliverance. Out
of  these  three  methods,  the  path  of  bhakti-yoga  is  especially  suitable  for  this
age  because  it  is  the  most  direct  method  of  God  realization.  To  be  doubly
assured,  Arjuna  is  asking  Lord  Kåñëa  to  confirm  His  former  statement.  One
may sincerely accept the path of self-realization, but the process of cultivation
of knowledge and the practice of the eightfold yoga system are generally very
difficult  for  this  age.  Therefore,  despite  constant  endeavor  one  may  fail,  for
many reasons. First of all, one may not be sufficiently serious about following

the process. To pursue the transcendental path is more or less to declare war
on  the  illusory  energy.  Consequently,  whenever  a  person  tries  to  escape  the
clutches  of  the  illusory  energy,  she  tries  to  defeat  the  practitioner  by  various
allurements.  A  conditioned  soul  is  already  allured  by  the  modes  of  material
energy,  and  there  is  every  chance  of  being  allured  again,  even  while
performing  transcendental  disciplines.  This  is  called  yogäc  calita-mänasaù:
deviation  from  the  transcendental  path.  Arjuna  is  inquisitive  to  know  the
results of deviation from the path of self-realization.

TEXT  38

k-iÀàae>aYaiv>a]íiX^àa>a]iMav NaXYaiTa )

APa[iTaïae Mahabahae ivMaU!ae b]ø<a" PaiQa )) 38 ))

kaccin nobhaya-vibhrañöaç
chinnäbhram iva naçyati
apratiñöho mahä-bäho
vimüòho brahmaëaù pathi

SYNONYMS

kaccit—whether; na—not; ubhaya—both; vibhrañöaù—deviated from;
chinna—torn; abhram—cloud; iva—like; naçyati—perishes;
apratiñöhaù—without any position; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed Kåñëa;
vimüòhaù—bewildered; brahmaëaù—of transcendence; pathi—on the path.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed Kåñëa, does not such a man, who is bewildered from the
path of transcendence, fall away from both spiritual and material success and
perish like a riven cloud, with no position in any sphere?

PURPORT

There are two ways to progress. Those who are materialists have no interest
in transcendence; therefore they are more interested in material advancement
by  economic  development,  or  in  promotion  to  the  higher  planets  by
appropriate  work.  When  one  takes  to  the  path  of  transcendence,  one  has  to
cease  all  material  activities  and  sacrifice  all  forms  of  so-called  material
happiness. If the aspiring transcendentalist fails, then he apparently loses both
ways;  in  other  words,  he  can  enjoy  neither  material  happiness  nor  spiritual
success.  He  has  no  position;  he  is  like  a  riven  cloud.  A  cloud  in  the  sky
sometimes deviates from a small cloud and joins a big one. But if it cannot join
a big one, then it is blown away by the wind and becomes a nonentity in the
vast  sky.  The  brahmaëaù  pathi  is  the  path  of  transcendental  realization
through  knowing  oneself  to  be  spiritual  in  essence,  part  and  parcel  of  the
Supreme Lord, who is manifested as Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän. Lord
Çré  Kåñëa  is  the  fullest  manifestation  of  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth,  and
therefore  one  who  is  surrendered  to  the  Supreme  Person  is  a  successful
transcendentalist. To reach this goal of life through Brahman and Paramätmä
realization  takes  many,  many  births  (bahünäà  janmanäm  ante    [Bg.  7.19]).
Therefore  the  supermost  path  of  transcendental  realization  is  bhakti-yoga,  or
Kåñëa consciousness, the direct method.

TEXT  39

WTaNMae Sa&XaYa& k*-Z<a ^etauMahRSYaXaezTa" )

TvdNYa" Sa&XaYaSYaaSYa ^etaa Na ùuPaPaÛTae )) 39 ))

etan me saàçayaà kåñëa
chettum arhasy açeñataù
tvad-anyaù saàçayasyäsya
chettä na hy upapadyate

SYNONYMS

etat—this is; me—my; saàçayam—doubt; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; chettum—to dispel;

arhasi—You are requested; açeñataù—completely; tvat—than You;
anyaù—other; saàçayasya—of the doubt; asya—this; chettä—remover;
na—never; hi—certainly; upapadyate—is to be found.

TRANSLATION

This is my doubt, O Kåñëa, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But for

You, no one is to be found who can destroy this doubt.

PURPORT

Kåñëa is the perfect knower of past, present and future. In the beginning of
the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord said that all living entities existed individually in
the past, they exist now in the present, and they continue to retain individual
identity  in  the  future,  even  after  liberation  from  the  material  entanglement.
So He has already cleared up the question of the future of the individual living
entity.  Now,  Arjuna  wants  to  know  of  the  future  of  the  unsuccessful
transcendentalist.  No  one  is  equal  to  or  above  Kåñëa,  and  certainly  the
so-called great sages and philosophers who are at the mercy of material nature
cannot  equal  Him.  Therefore  the  verdict  of  Kåñëa  is  the  final  and  complete
answer to all doubts, because He knows past, present and future perfectly—but
no one knows Him. Kåñëa and Kåñëa conscious devotees alone can know what
is what.

TEXT  40

é[q>aGavaNauvac

PaaQaR NaEveh NaaMau}a ivNaaXaSTaSYa ivÛTae )

Na ih k-LYaa<ak*-Tk-iêÕuGaRiTa& TaaTa GaC^iTa )) 40 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
pärtha naiveha nämutra
vinäças tasya vidyate

na hi kalyäëa-kåt kaçcid
durgatià täta gacchati

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pärtha—O son
of Påthä; na eva—never is it so; iha—in this material world; na—never;
amutra—in the next life; vinäçaù—destruction; tasya—his; vidyate—exists;
na—never; hi—certainly; kalyäëa-kåt—one who is engaged in auspicious
activities; kaçcit—anyone; durgatim—to degradation; täta—My friend;
gacchati—goes.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Son of Påthä, a transcendentalist

engaged in auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in this
world or in the spiritual world; one who does good, My friend, is never
overcome by evil.

PURPORT

In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.17) Çré Närada Muni instructs Vyäsadeva as

follows:

tyaktvä sva-dharmaà caraëämbujaà harer
bhajann apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva väbhadram abhüd amuñya kià
ko värtha äpto ’bhajatäà sva-dharmataù

“If someone gives up all material prospects and takes complete shelter of the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  there  is  no  loss  or  degradation  in  any  way.
On the other hand a nondevotee may fully engage in his occupational duties
and  yet  not  gain  anything.”  For  material  prospects  there  are  many  activities,
both  scriptural  and  customary.  A  transcendentalist  is  supposed  to  give  up  all
material  activities  for  the  sake  of  spiritual  advancement  in  life,  Kåñëa

consciousness. One may argue that by Kåñëa consciousness one may attain the
highest  perfection  if  it  is  completed,  but  if  one  does  not  attain  such  a
perfectional stage, then he loses both materially and spiritually. It is enjoined
in  the  scriptures  that  one  has  to  suffer  the  reaction  for  not  executing
prescribed  duties;  therefore  one  who  fails  to  discharge  transcendental
activities  properly  becomes  subjected  to  these  reactions.  The  Bhägavatam
assures the unsuccessful transcendentalist that there need be no worries. Even
though  he  may  be  subjected  to  the  reaction  for  not  perfectly  executing
prescribed duties, he is still not a loser, because auspicious Kåñëa consciousness
is  never  forgotten,  and  one  so  engaged  will  continue  to  be  so  even  if  he  is
lowborn  in  the  next  life.  On  the  other  hand,  one  who  simply  follows  strictly
the  prescribed  duties  need  not  necessarily  attain  auspicious  results  if  he  is
lacking in Kåñëa consciousness.

The purport may be understood as follows. Humanity may be divided into
two  sections,  namely,  the  regulated  and  the  nonregulated.  Those  who  are
engaged simply in bestial sense gratifications without knowledge of their next
life  or  spiritual  salvation  belong  to  the  nonregulated  section.  And  those  who
follow  the  principles  of  prescribed  duties  in  the  scriptures  are  classified
amongst  the  regulated  section.  The  nonregulated  section,  both  civilized  and
noncivilized,  educated  and  noneducated,  strong  and  weak,  are  full  of  animal
propensities. Their activities are never auspicious, because while enjoying the
animal propensities of eating, sleeping, defending and mating, they perpetually
remain  in  material  existence,  which  is  always  miserable.  On  the  other  hand,
those who are regulated by scriptural injunctions, and who thus rise gradually
to Kåñëa consciousness, certainly progress in life.

Those  who  are  following  the  path  of  auspiciousness  can  be  divided  into
three sections, namely (1) the followers of scriptural rules and regulations who
are  enjoying  material  prosperity,  (2)  those  who  are  trying  to  find  ultimate
liberation  from  material  existence,  and  (3)  those  who  are  devotees  in  Kåñëa
consciousness.  Those  who  are  following  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the
scriptures for material happiness may be further divided into two classes: those
who are fruitive workers and those who desire no fruit for sense gratification.
Those who are after fruitive results for sense gratification may be elevated to a

higher standard of life—even to the higher planets—but still, because they are
not  free  from  material  existence,  they  are  not  following  the  truly  auspicious
path.  The  only  auspicious  activities  are  those  which  lead  one  to  liberation.
Any activity which is not aimed at ultimate self-realization or liberation from
the  material  bodily  concept  of  life  is  not  at  all  auspicious.  Activity  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  the  only  auspicious  activity,  and  anyone  who  voluntarily
accepts  all  bodily  discomforts  for  the  sake  of  making  progress  on  the  path  of
Kåñëa  consciousness  can  be  called  a  perfect  transcendentalist  under  severe
austerity.  And  because  the  eightfold  yoga  system  is  directed  toward  the
ultimate  realization  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  such  practice  is  also  auspicious,
and no one who is trying his best in this matter need fear degradation.

TEXT  41

Pa[aPYa Pau<Yak*-Taa& l/aek-aNauizTva XaaìTaq" SaMaa" )

éucqNaa& é[qMaTaa& Gaehe YaaeGa>a]íae_i>aJaaYaTae )) 41 ))

präpya puëya-kåtäà lokän
uñitvä çäçvatéù samäù
çucénäà çrématäà gehe
yoga-bhrañöo ’bhijäyate

SYNONYMS

präpya—after achieving; puëya-kåtäm—of those who performed pious
activities; lokän—planets; uñitvä—after dwelling; çäçvatéù—many;
samäù—years; çucénäm—of the pious; çré-matäm—of the prosperous; gehe—in
the house; yoga-bhrañöaù—one who has fallen from the path of self-realization;
abhijäyate—takes his birth.

TRANSLATION

The unsuccessful yogé, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets

of the pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous people, or into a

family of rich aristocracy.

PURPORT

The unsuccessful yogés are divided into two classes: one is fallen after very
little progress, and one is fallen after long practice of yoga. The yogé who falls
after a short period of practice goes to the higher planets, where pious living
entities are allowed to enter. After prolonged life there, one is sent back again
to this planet, to take birth in the family of a righteous brähmaëa vaiñëava or
of aristocratic merchants.

The  real  purpose  of  yoga  practice  is  to  achieve  the  highest  perfection  of
Kåñëa  consciousness,  as  explained  in  the  last  verse  of  this  chapter.  But  those
who  do  not  persevere  to  such  an  extent  and  who  fail  because  of  material
allurements  are  allowed,  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  to  make  full  utilization  of
their material propensities. And after that, they are given opportunities to live
prosperous  lives  in  righteous  or  aristocratic  families.  Those  who  are  born  in
such families may take advantage of the facilities and try to elevate themselves
to full Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  42

AQava YaaeiGaNaaMaev ku-le/ >aviTa DaqMaTaaMa( )

WTaiÖ dulR/>aTar& l/aeke- JaNMa Yadqd*XaMa( )) 42 ))

atha vä yoginäm eva
kule bhavati dhématäm
etad dhi durlabhataraà
loke janma yad édåçam

SYNONYMS

atha vä—or; yoginäm—of learned transcendentalists; eva—certainly; kule—in
the family; bhavati—takes birth; dhé-matäm—of those who are endowed with
great wisdom; etat—this; hi—certainly; durlabha-taram—very rare; loke—in

this world; janma—birth; yat—that which; édåçam—like this.

TRANSLATION

Or [if unsuccessful after long practice of yoga] he takes his birth in a family
of transcendentalists who are surely great in wisdom. Certainly, such a birth is
rare in this world.

PURPORT

Birth  in  a  family  of  yogés  or  transcendentalists—those  with  great
wisdom—is praised herein because the child born in such a family receives a
spiritual impetus from the very beginning of his life. It is especially the case in
the äcärya or gosvämé families. Such families are very learned and devoted by
tradition and training, and thus they become spiritual masters. In India there
are  many  such  äcärya  families,  but  they  have  now  degenerated  due  to
insufficient  education  and  training.  By  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  there  are  still
families  that  foster  transcendentalists  generation  after  generation.  It  is
certainly  very  fortunate  to  take  birth  in  such  families.  Fortunately,  both  our
spiritual  master,  Oà  Viñëupäda  Çré  Çrémad  Bhaktisiddhänta  Sarasvaté
Gosvämé Mahäräja, and our humble self had the opportunity to take birth in
such  families,  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  and  both  of  us  were  trained  in  the
devotional service of the Lord from the very beginning of our lives. Later on
we met by the order of the transcendental system.

TEXT  43

Ta}a Ta& buiÖSa&YaaeGa& l/>aTae PaaEvRdeihk-Ma( )

YaTaTae c TaTaae >aUYa" Sa&iSaÖaE ku-åNaNdNa )) 43 ))

tatra taà buddhi-saàyogaà
labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhüyaù
saàsiddhau kuru-nandana

SYNONYMS

tatra—thereupon; tam—that; buddhi-saàyogam—revival of consciousness;
labhate—gains; paurva-dehikam—from the previous body; yatate—he
endeavors; ca—also; tataù—thereafter; bhüyaù—again; saàsiddhau—for
perfection; kuru-nandana—O son of Kuru.

TRANSLATION

On taking such a birth, he revives the divine consciousness of his previous

life, and he again tries to make further progress in order to achieve complete
success, O son of Kuru.

PURPORT

King Bharata, who took his third birth in the family of a good brähmaëa, is
an  example  of  good  birth  for  the  revival  of  previous  transcendental
consciousness. King Bharata was the emperor of the world, and since his time
this planet has been known among the demigods as Bhärata-varña. Formerly it
was known as Ilävåta-varña. The emperor, at an early age, retired for spiritual
perfection  but  failed  to  achieve  success.  In  his  next  life  he  took  birth  in  the
family of a good brähmaëa and was known as Jaòa Bharata because he always
remained secluded and did not talk to anyone. And later on he was discovered
as  the  greatest  transcendentalist  by  King  Rahügaëa.  From  his  life  it  is
understood that transcendental endeavors, or the practice of yoga, never go in
vain.  By  the  grace  of  the  Lord  the  transcendentalist  gets  repeated
opportunities for complete perfection in Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  44

 PaUvaR>YaaSaeNa TaeNaEv ihYaTae ùvXaae_iPa Sa" )

iJajaSauriPa YaaeGaSYa XaBdb]øaiTavTaRTae )) 44 ))

pürväbhyäsena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaço ’pi saù
jijïäsur api yogasya
çabda-brahmätivartate

SYNONYMS

pürva—previous; abhyäsena—by practice; tena—by that; eva—certainly;
hriyate—is attracted; hi—surely; avaçaù—automatically; api—also; saù—he;
jijïäsuù—inquisitive; api—even; yogasya—about yoga;
çabda-brahma—ritualistic principles of scriptures; ativartate—transcends.

TRANSLATION

By virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he automatically
becomes attracted to the yogic principles—even without seeking them. Such an
inquisitive transcendentalist stands always above the ritualistic principles of the
scriptures.

PURPORT

Advanced yogés are not very much attracted to the rituals of the scriptures,
but  they  automatically  become  attracted  to  the  yoga  principles,  which  can
elevate them to complete Kåñëa consciousness, the highest yoga perfection. In
the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (3.33.7),  such  disregard  of  Vedic  rituals  by  the
advanced transcendentalists is explained as follows:

aho bata çva-paco ’to garéyän
yaj-jihvägre vartate näma tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuù sasnur äryä
brahmänücur näma gåëanti ye te

“O my Lord! Persons who chant the holy names of Your Lordship are far,
far  advanced  in  spiritual  life,  even  if  born  in  families  of  dog-eaters.  Such
chanters  have  undoubtedly  performed  all  kinds  of  austerities  and  sacrifices,

bathed in all sacred places, and finished all scriptural studies.”

The famous example of this was presented by Lord Caitanya, who accepted
Öhäkura  Haridäsa  as  one  of  His  most  important  disciples.  Although  Öhäkura
Haridäsa happened to take his birth in a Muslim family, he was elevated to the
post  of  nämäcärya  by  Lord  Caitanya  due  to  his  rigidly  attended  principle  of
chanting  three  hundred  thousand  holy  names  of  the  Lord  daily:  Hare  Kåñëa,
Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,
Hare Hare. And because he chanted the holy name of the Lord constantly, it is
understood  that  in  his  previous  life  he  must  have  passed  through  all  the
ritualistic  methods  of  the  Vedas,  known  as  çabda-brahma.  Unless,  therefore,
one  is  purified,  one  cannot  take  to  the  principles  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  or
become engaged in chanting the holy name of the Lord, Hare Kåñëa.

TEXT  45

Pa[YaÒaÛTaMaaNaSTau YaaeGaq Sa&éuÖik-iLbz" )

ANaek-JaNMaSa&iSaÖSTaTaae YaaiTa Para& GaiTaMa( )) 45 ))

prayatnäd yatamänas tu
yogé saàçuddha-kilbiñaù
aneka-janma-saàsiddhas
tato yäti paräà gatim

SYNONYMS

prayatnät—by rigid practice; yatamänaù—endeavoring; tu—and; yogé—such a
transcendentalist; saàçuddha—washed off; kilbiñaù—all of whose sins;
aneka—after many, many; janma—births; saàsiddhaù—having achieved
perfection; tataù—thereafter; yäti—attains; paräm—the highest;
gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

And when the yogé engages himself with sincere endeavor in making further

progress, being washed of all contaminations, then ultimately, achieving
perfection after many, many births of practice, he attains the supreme goal.

PURPORT

A  person  born  in  a  particularly  righteous,  aristocratic  or  sacred  family
becomes conscious of his favorable condition for executing yoga practice. With
determination,  therefore,  he  begins  his  unfinished  task,  and  thus  he
completely cleanses himself of all material contaminations. When he is finally
free  from  all  contaminations,  he  attains  the  supreme  perfection—Kåñëa
consciousness.  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  the  perfect  stage  of  being  freed  of  all
contaminations. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.28):

yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù

“After  many,  many  births  of  executing  pious  activities,  when  one  is
completely  freed  from  all  contaminations,  and  from  all  illusory  dualities,  one
becomes engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.”

TEXT  46

TaPaiSv>Yaae_iDak-ae YaaeGaq jaiNa>Yaae_iPa MaTaae_iDak-" )

k-iMaR>YaêaiDak-ae YaaeGaq TaSMaaÛaeGaq >avaJauRNa )) 46 ))

tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogé
jïänibhyo ’pi mato ’dhikaù
karmibhyaç cädhiko yogé
tasmäd yogé bhavärjuna

SYNONYMS

tapasvibhyaù—than the ascetics; adhikaù—greater; yogé—the yogé;

jïänibhyaù—than the wise; api—also; mataù—considered; adhikaù—greater;
karmibhyaù—than the fruitive workers; ca—also; adhikaù—greater; yogé—the
yogé; tasmät—therefore; yogé—a transcendentalist; bhava—just become;
arjuna—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

A yogé is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and greater
than the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in all circumstances, be a yogé.

PURPORT

When  we  speak  of  yoga  we  refer  to  linking  our  consciousness  with  the
Supreme  Absolute  Truth.  Such  a  process  is  named  differently  by  various
practitioners  in  terms  of  the  particular  method  adopted.  When  the  linking
process is predominantly in fruitive activities it is called karma-yoga, when it is
predominantly empirical it is called jïäna-yoga, and when it is predominantly
in  a  devotional  relationship  with  the  Supreme  Lord  it  is  called  bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga, or Kåñëa consciousness, is the ultimate perfection of all yogas, as
will  be  explained  in  the  next  verse.  The  Lord  has  confirmed  herein  the
superiority of yoga, but He has not mentioned that it is better than bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga  is  full  spiritual  knowledge,  and  therefore  nothing  can  excel  it.
Asceticism  without  self-knowledge  is  imperfect.  Empiric  knowledge  without
surrender  to  the  Supreme  Lord  is  also  imperfect.  And  fruitive  work  without
Kåñëa consciousness is a waste of time. Therefore, the most highly praised form
of  yoga  performance  mentioned  here  is  bhakti-yoga,  and  this  is  still  more
clearly explained in the next verse.

TEXT  47

YaaeiGaNaaMaiPa SaveRza& MaÓTaeNaaNTaraTMaNaa )

é[ÖavaN>aJaTae Yaae Maa& Sa Mae Yau¢-TaMaae MaTa" )) 47 ))

yoginäm api sarveñäà

mad-gatenäntar-ätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù

SYNONYMS

yoginäm—of yogés; api—also; sarveñäm—all types of; mat-gatena—abiding in
Me, always thinking of Me; antaù-ätmanä—within himself; çraddhä-vän—in
full faith; bhajate—renders transcendental loving service; yaù—one who;
mäm—to Me (the Supreme Lord); saù—he; me—by Me; yukta-tamaù—the
greatest yogé; mataù—is considered.

TRANSLATION

And of all yogés, the one with great faith who always abides in Me, thinks of
Me within himself, and renders transcendental loving service to Me—he is the
most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all. That is My
opinion.

PURPORT

The  word  bhajate  is  significant  here.  Bhajate  has  its  root  in  the  verb  bhaj,
which  is  used  when  there  is  need  of  service.  The  English  word  “worship”
cannot be used in the same sense as bhaj. Worship means to adore, or to show
respect  and  honor  to  the  worthy  one.  But  service  with  love  and  faith  is
especially  meant  for  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  One  can  avoid
worshiping a respectable man or a demigod and may be called discourteous, but
one  cannot  avoid  serving  the  Supreme  Lord  without  being  thoroughly
condemned. Every living entity is part and parcel of the Supreme Personality
of  Godhead,  and  thus  every  living  entity  is  intended  to  serve  the  Supreme
Lord  by  his  own  constitution.  Failing  to  do  this,  he  falls  down.  The
Bhägavatam (11.5.3) confirms this as follows:

ya eñäà puruñaà säkñäd
ätma-prabhavam éçvaram

na bhajanty avajänanti
sthänäd bhrañöäù patanty adhaù

“Anyone  who  does  not  render  service  and  neglects  his  duty  unto  the
primeval Lord, who is the source of all living entities, will certainly fall down
from his constitutional position.”

In this verse also the word bhajanti is used. Therefore, bhajanti is applicable
to  the  Supreme  Lord  only,  whereas  the  word  “worship”  can  be  applied  to
demigods or to any other common living entity. The word avajänanti, used in
this verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, is also found in the Bhagavad-gétä. Avajänanti
mäà  müòhäù:  “Only  the  fools  and  rascals  deride  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  Lord  Kåñëa.”  Such  fools  take  it  upon  themselves  to  write
commentaries on the Bhagavad-gétä without an attitude of service to the Lord.
Consequently they cannot properly distinguish between the word bhajanti and
the word “worship.”

The culmination of all kinds of yoga practices lies in bhakti yoga. All other
yogas are but means to come to the point of bhakti in bhakti-yoga. Yoga actually
means  bhakti-yoga;  all  other  yogas  are  progressions  toward  the  destination  of
bhakti-yoga.  From  the  beginning  of  karma-yoga  to  the  end  of  bhakti-yoga  is  a
long  way  to  self-realization.  Karma-yoga,  without  fruitive  results,  is  the
beginning  of  this  path.  When  karma-yoga  increases  in  knowledge  and
renunciation,  the  stage  is  called  jïäna-yoga.  When  jïäna-yoga  increases  in
meditation  on  the  Supersoul  by  different  physical  processes,  and  the  mind  is
on  Him,  it  is  called  añöäìga-yoga.  And  when  one  surpasses  the  añöäìga-yoga
and  comes  to  the  point  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  Kåñëa,  it  is
called bhakti yoga, the culmination. Factually, bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal,
but  to  analyze  bhakti-yoga  minutely  one  has  to  understand  these  other  yogas.
The  yogé  who  is  progressive  is  therefore  on  the  true  path  of  eternal  good
fortune.  One  who  sticks  to  a  particular  point  and  does  not  make  further
progress  is  called  by  that  particular  name:  karma-yogé, 
jïäna-yogé  or
dhyäna-yogé, räja-yogé, haöha-yogé, etc. If one is fortunate enough to come to the
point of bhakti-yoga, it is to be understood that he has surpassed all other yogas.
Therefore,  to  become  Kåñëa  conscious  is  the  highest  stage  of  yoga,  just  as,
when  we  speak  of  Himälayan,  we  refer  to  the  world’s  highest  mountains,  of

which the highest peak, Mount Everest, is considered to be the culmination.

It is by great fortune that one comes to Kåñëa consciousness on the path of
bhakti-yoga to become well situated according to the Vedic direction. The ideal
yogé concentrates his attention on Kåñëa, who is called Çyämasundara, who is
as beautifully colored as a cloud, whose lotuslike face is as effulgent as the sun,
whose  dress  is  brilliant  with  jewels  and  whose  body  is  flower-garlanded.
Illuminating all sides is His gorgeous luster, which is called the brahmajyoti. He
incarnates in different forms such as Räma, Nåsiàha, Varäha and Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He descends like a human being, as the
son of mother Yaçodä, and He is known as Kåñëa, Govinda and Väsudeva. He
is  the  perfect  child,  husband,  friend  and  master,  and  He  is  full  with  all
opulences and transcendental qualities. If one remains fully conscious of these
features of the Lord, he is called the highest yogi.

This stage of highest perfection in yoga can be attained only by bhakti-yoga,

as is confirmed in all Vedic literature:

yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù

“Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and
the  spiritual  master  are  all  the  imports  of  Vedic  knowledge  automatically
revealed.” [ÇU 6.23(526)]

asya 

Bhaktir 

bhajanaà 

ihämutropädhi-nairäsyenämuñmin
tad 
manaù-kalpanam,  etad  eva  naiñkarmyam.  “Bhakti  means  devotional  service  to
the Lord which is free from desire for material profit, either in this life or in
the next. Devoid of such inclinations, one should fully absorb the mind in the
Supreme. That is the purpose of naiñkarmya.” (Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad 1.15)

These  are  some  of  the  means  for  performance  of  bhakti,  or  Kåñëa

consciousness, the highest perfectional stage of the yoga system.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Dhyäna-yoga.

- CHAPTER 7 -
Knowledge of the Absolute

TEXT  1

é[q>aGavaNauvac

MaYYaaSa¢-MaNaa" PaaQaR YaaeGa& YauÅNMadaé[Ya" )

ASa&XaYa& SaMaGa]& Maa& YaQaa jaSYaiSa TaC^*<au )) 1 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
mayy äsakta-manäù pärtha
yogaà yuïjan mad-äçrayaù
asaàçayaà samagraà mäà
yathä jïäsyasi tac chåëu

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Lord said; mayi—to Me;
äsakta-manäù—mind attached; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
yogam—self-realization; yuïjan—practicing; mat-äçrayaù—in consciousness of
Me (Kåñëa consciousness); asaàçayam—without doubt;
samagram—completely; mäm—Me; yathä—how; jïäsyasi—you can know;
tat—that; çåëu—try to hear.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Now hear, O son of Påthä, how

by practicing yoga in full consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you
can know Me in full, free from doubt.

PURPORT

In  this  Seventh  Chapter  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  the  nature  of  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  fully  described.  Kåñëa  is  full  in  all  opulences,  and  how  He
manifests  such  opulences  is  described  herein.  Also,  four  kinds  of  fortunate
people  who  become  attached  to  Kåñëa  and  four  kinds  of  unfortunate  people
who never take to Kåñëa are described in this chapter.

In  the  first  six  chapters  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  the  living  entity  has  been
described  as  nonmaterial  spirit  soul  capable  of  elevating  himself  to
self-realization by different types of yogas. At the end of the Sixth Chapter, it
has been clearly stated that the steady concentration of the mind upon Kåñëa,
or  in  other  words  Kåñëa  consciousness,  is  the  highest  form  of  all  yoga.  By
concentrating one’s mind upon Kåñëa, one is able to know the Absolute Truth
completely, but not otherwise. Impersonal brahmajyoti or localized Paramätmä
realization  is  not  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth,  because  it  is
partial.  Full  and  scientific  knowledge  is  Kåñëa,  and  everything  is  revealed  to
the  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  In  complete  Kåñëa  consciousness  one
knows that Kåñëa is ultimate knowledge beyond any doubts. Different types of
yoga  are  only  steppingstones  on  the  path  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  One  who
takes  directly  to  Kåñëa  consciousness  automatically  knows  about  brahmajyoti
and Paramätmä in full. By practice of Kåñëa consciousness yoga, one can know
everything  in  full—namely  the  Absolute  Truth,  the  living  entities,  the
material nature, and their manifestations with paraphernalia.

One should therefore begin yoga practice as directed in the last verse of the
Sixth  Chapter.  Concentration  of  the  mind upon Kåñëa the Supreme is made
possible  by  prescribed  devotional  service  in  nine  different  forms,  of  which
çravaëam is the first and most important. The Lord therefore says to Arjuna,
tac chåëu, or “Hear from Me.” No one can be a greater authority than Kåñëa,
and  therefore  by  hearing  from  Him  one  receives  the  greatest  opportunity  to
become  a  perfectly  Kåñëa  conscious  person.  One  has  therefore  to  learn  from

Kåñëa directly or from a pure devotee of Kåñëa—and not from a nondevotee
upstart, puffed up with academic education.

In  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  this  process  of  understanding  Kåñëa,  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the  Absolute  Truth,  is  described  in  the
Second Chapter of the First Canto as follows:

çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
hådy antaù-stho hy abhadräëi
vidhunoti suhåt satäm

nañöa-präyeñv abhadreñu
nityaà bhägavata-sevayä
bhagavaty uttama-çloke
bhaktir bhavati naiñöhiké

tadä rajas-tamo-bhäväù
käma-lobhädayaç ca ye
ceta etair anäviddhaà
sthitaà sattve prasédati

evaà prasanna-manaso
bhagavad-bhakti-yogataù
bhagavat-tattva-vijïänaà
mukta-saìgasya jäyate

bhidyate hådaya-granthiç
chidyante sarva-saàçayäù
kñéyante cäsya karmäëi
dåñöa evätmanéçvare

“To hear about Kåñëa from Vedic literatures, or to hear from Him directly
through the Bhagavad-gétä, is itself righteous activity. And for one who hears
about  Kåñëa,  Lord  Kåñëa,  who  is  dwelling  in  everyone’s  heart,  acts  as  a
best-wishing  friend  and  purifies  the  devotee  who  constantly  engages  in
hearing  of  Him.  In  this  way,  a  devotee  naturally  develops  his  dormant

transcendental  knowledge.  As  he  hears  more  about  Kåñëa  from  the
Bhägavatam and from the devotees, he becomes fixed in the devotional service
of the Lord. By development of devotional service one becomes freed from the
modes  of  passion  and  ignorance,  and  thus  material  lusts  and  avarice  are
diminished.  When  these  impurities  are  wiped  away,  the  candidate  remains
steady  in  his  position  of  pure  goodness,  becomes  enlivened  by  devotional
service and understands the science of God perfectly. Thus bhakti-yoga severs
the  hard  knot  of  material  affection  and  enables  one  to  come  at  once  to  the
stage of asaàçayaà-samagram, understanding of the Supreme Absolute Truth
Personality of Godhead.” (Bhäg. 1.2.17–21)

Therefore  only  by  hearing  from  Kåñëa  or  from  His  devotee  in  Kåñëa

consciousness can one understand the science of Kåñëa.

TEXT  2

jaNa& Tae_h& SaivjaNaiMad& v+YaaMYaXaezTa" )

YaJjaTva Naeh >aUYaae_NYaJjaTaVYaMaviXaZYaTae )) 2 ))

jïänaà te ’haà sa-vijïänam
idaà vakñyämy açeñataù
yaj jïätvä neha bhüyo ’nyaj
jïätavyam avaçiñyate

SYNONYMS

jïänam—phenomenal knowledge; te—unto you; aham—I; sa—with;
vijïänam—numinous knowledge; idam—this; vakñyämi—shall explain;
açeñataù—in full; yat—which; jïätvä—knowing; na—not; iha—in this world;
bhüyaù—further; anyat—anything more; jïätavyam—knowable;
avaçiñyate—remains.

TRANSLATION

I shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge, both phenomenal and

numinous. This being known, nothing further shall remain for you to know.

PURPORT

Complete  knowledge  includes  knowledge  of  the  phenomenal  world,  the
spirit  behind  it,  and  the  source  of  both  of  them.  This  is  transcendental
knowledge.  The  Lord  wants  to  explain  the  above-mentioned  system  of
knowledge  because  Arjuna  is  Kåñëa’s  confidential  devotee  and  friend.  In  the
beginning of the Fourth Chapter this explanation was given by the Lord, and
it  is  again  confirmed  here:  complete  knowledge  can  be  achieved  only  by  the
devotee  of  the  Lord  in  disciplic  succession  directly  from  the  Lord.  Therefore
one should be intelligent enough to know the source of all knowledge, who is
the cause of all causes and the only object for meditation in all types of yoga
practice.  When  the  cause  of  all  causes  becomes  known,  then  everything
knowable  becomes  known,  and  nothing  remains  unknown.  The  Vedas
(Muëòaka Upaniñad  1.3)  say,  kasmin  bhagavo  vijïäte  sarvam  idaà  vijïätaà
bhavati.

TEXT  3

MaNauZYaa<aa& Sahóezu k-iêÛTaiTa iSaÖYae )

YaTaTaaMaiPa iSaÖaNaa& k-iêNMaa& veita TatvTa" )) 3 ))

manuñyäëäà sahasreñu
kaçcid yatati siddhaye
yatatäm api siddhänäà
kaçcin mäà vetti tattvataù

SYNONYMS

manuñyäëäm—of men; sahasreñu—out of many thousands; kaçcit—someone;
yatati—endeavors; siddhaye—for perfection; yatatäm—of those so
endeavoring; api—indeed; siddhänäm—of those who have achieved
perfection; kaçcit—someone; mäm—Me; vetti—does know; tattvataù—in fact.

TRANSLATION

Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of

those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.

PURPORT

There  are  various  grades  of  men,  and  out  of  many  thousands,  one  may  be
sufficiently interested in transcendental realization to try to know what is the
self, what is the body, and what is the Absolute Truth. Generally mankind is
simply engaged in the animal propensities, namely eating, sleeping, defending
and mating, and hardly anyone is interested in transcendental knowledge. The
first  six  chapters  of  the  Gétä  are  meant  for  those  who  are  interested  in
transcendental  knowledge,  in  understanding  the  self,  the  Superself  and  the
process of realization by jïäna-yoga, dhyäna-yoga and discrimination of the self
from matter. However, Kåñëa can be known only by persons who are in Kåñëa
consciousness.  Other  transcendentalists  may  achieve  impersonal  Brahman
realization, for this is easier than understanding Kåñëa. Kåñëa is the Supreme
Person,  but  at  the  same  time  He  is  beyond  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  and
Paramätmä. The yogés and jïänés are confused in their attempts to understand
Kåñëa. Although the greatest of the impersonalists, Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya, has
admitted  in  his  Gétä  commentary  that  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  his  followers  do  not  accept  Kåñëa  as  such,  for  it  is  very  difficult  to
know  Kåñëa,  even  though  one  has  transcendental  realization  of  impersonal
Brahman.

Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the  cause  of  all  causes,  the
primeval  Lord  Govinda.  Éçvaraù  paramaù  kåñëaù  sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù/
anädir  ädir  govindaù  sarva-käraëa-käraëam.  It  is  very  difficult  for  the
nondevotees  to  know  Him.  Although  nondevotees  declare  that  the  path  of
bhakti, or devotional service, is very easy, they cannot practice it. If the path of
bhakti  is  so  easy,  as  the  nondevotee  class  of  men  proclaim,  then  why  do  they
take up the difficult path? Actually the path of bhakti is not easy. The so-called
path of bhakti practiced by unauthorized persons without knowledge of bhakti

may  be  easy,  but  when  it  is  practiced  factually  according  to  the  rules  and
regulations, the speculative scholars and philosophers fall away from the path.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé writes in his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.101):

çruti-småti-puräëädi-
païcarätra-vidhià vinä
aikäntiké harer bhaktir
utpätäyaiva kalpate

“Devotional  service  of  the  Lord  that  ignores  the  authorized  Vedic
literatures  like  the  Upaniñads,  Puräëas  and  Närada-païcarätra  is  simply  an
unnecessary disturbance in society.”

It 

is  not  possible  for  the  Brahman-realized 

impersonalist  or  the
Paramätmä-realized  yogé  to  understand  Kåñëa  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead  as  the  son  of  mother  Yaçodä  or  the  charioteer  of  Arjuna.  Even  the
great  demigods  are  sometimes  confused  about  Kåñëa  (muhyanti  yat  sürayaù).
Mäà  tu  veda  na  kaçcana:  “No  one  knows  Me  as  I  am,”  the  Lord  says.  And  if
one does know Him, then sa mahätmä su-durlabhaù. “Such a great soul is very
rare.”  Therefore  unless  one  practices  devotional  service  to  the  Lord,  one
cannot know Kåñëa as He is (tattvataù), even though one is a great scholar or
philosopher. Only the pure devotees can know something of the inconceivable
transcendental  qualities  in  Kåñëa,  in  the  cause  of  all  causes,  in  His
omnipotence  and  opulence,  and  in  His  wealth,  fame,  strength,  beauty,
knowledge  and  renunciation,  because  Kåñëa  is  benevolently  inclined  to  His
devotees.  He  is  the  last  word  in  Brahman  realization,  and  the  devotees  alone
can realize Him as He is. Therefore it is said:

ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù

“No one can understand Kåñëa as He is by the blunt material senses. But He
reveals  Himself  to  the  devotees,  being  pleased  with  them  for  their
transcendental loving service unto Him.” (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.234)

TEXT  4

>aUiMaraPaae_Nal/ae vaYau" %& MaNaae buiÖrev c )

Ahªar wTaqYa& Mae i>aàa Pa[k*-iTaríDaa )) 4 ))

bhümir äpo ’nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä

SYNONYMS

bhümiù—earth; äpaù—water; analaù—fire; väyuù—air; kham—ether;
manaù—mind; buddhiù—intelligence; eva—certainly; ca—and;
ahaìkäraù—false ego; iti—thus; iyam—all these; me—My; bhinnä—separated;
prakåtiù—energies; añöadhä—eightfold.

TRANSLATION

Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together

these eight constitute My separated material energies.

PURPORT

The  science  of  God  analyzes  the  constitutional  position  of  God  and  His
diverse energies. Material nature is called prakåti, or the energy of the Lord in
in  the
His  different  puruña 
Sätvata-tantra:

incarnations  (expansions)  as  described 

viñëos tu tréëi rüpäëi
puruñäkhyäny atho viduù
ekaà tu mahataù srañöå
dvitéyaà tv aëòa-saàsthitam
tåtéyaà sarva-bhüta-sthaà

täni jïätvä vimucyate

“For  material  creation,  Lord  Kåñëa’s  plenary  expansion  assumes  three
Viñëus. The first one, Mahä-Viñëu, creates the total material energy, known as
the  mahat-tattva.  The  second,  Garbhodakaçäyé  Viñëu,  enters  into  all  the
universes to create diversities in each of them. The third, Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu,
is diffused as the all-pervading Supersoul in all the universes and is known as
Paramätmä.  He  is  present  even  within  the  atoms.  Anyone  who  knows  these
three Viñëus can be liberated from material entanglement.”

This material world is a temporary manifestation of one of the energies of
the  Lord.  All  the  activities  of  the  material  world  are  directed  by  these  three
Viñëu  expansions  of  Lord  Kåñëa.  These  puruñas  are  called  incarnations.
Generally  one  who  does  not  know  the  science  of  God  (Kåñëa)  assumes  that
this  material  world  is  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  living  entities  and  that  the
living  entities  are  the  puruñas—the  causes,  controllers  and  enjoyers  of  the
material energy. According to Bhagavad-gétä this atheistic conclusion is false.
In the verse under discussion it is stated that Kåñëa is the original cause of the
material manifestation. Çrémad-Bhägavatam also confirms this. The ingredients
of  the  material  manifestation  are  separated  energies  of  the  Lord.  Even  the
brahmajyoti,  which  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  the  impersonalists,  is  a  spiritual
energy manifested in the spiritual sky. There are no spiritual diversities in the
brahmajyoti as there are in the Vaikuëöhalokas, and the impersonalist accepts
this brahmajyoti as the ultimate eternal goal. The Paramätmä manifestation is
also  a  temporary  all-pervasive  aspect  of  the  Kñérodakaçäyé  Viñëu.  The
Paramätmä  manifestation  is  not  eternal  in  the  spiritual  world.  Therefore  the
factual  Absolute  Truth  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  Kåñëa.  He  is
the  complete  energetic  person,  and  He  possesses  different  separated  and
internal energies.

In  the  material  energy,  the  principal  manifestations  are  eight,  as  above
mentioned.  Out  of  these,  the  first  five  manifestations,  namely  earth,  water,
fire,  air  and  sky,  are  called  the  five  gigantic  creations  or  the  gross  creations,
within which the five sense objects are included. They are the manifestations
of  physical  sound,  touch,  form,  taste  and  smell.  Material  science  comprises
these  ten  items  and  nothing  more.  But  the  other  three  items,  namely  mind,

intelligence and false ego, are neglected by the materialists. Philosophers who
deal with mental activities are also not perfect in knowledge because they do
not know the ultimate source, Kåñëa. The false ego—“I am,” and “It is mine,
which constitute the basic principle of material existence—includes ten sense
organs for material activities. Intelligence refers to the total material creation,
called  the  mahat-tattva.  Therefore  from  the  eight  separated  energies  of  the
Lord  are  manifest  the  twenty-four  elements  of  the  material  world,  which  are
the  subject  matter  of  Säìkhya  atheistic  philosophy;  they  are  originally
offshoots  from  Kåñëa’s  energies  and  are  separated  from  Him,  but  atheistic
Säìkhya  philosophers  with  a  poor  fund  of  knowledge  do  not  know  Kåñëa  as
the  cause  of  all  causes.  The  subject  matter  for  discussion  in  the  Säìkhya
philosophy  is  only  the  manifestation  of  the  external  energy  of  Kåñëa,  as  it  is
described in the Bhagavad-gétä.

TEXT  5

APareYaiMaTaSTvNYaa& Pa[k*-iTa& iviÖ Mae ParaMa( )

Jaqv>aUTaa& Mahabahae YaYaed& DaaYaRTae JaGaTa( )) 5 ))

apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat

SYNONYMS

aparä—inferior; iyam—this; itaù—besides this; tu—but; anyäm—another;
prakåtim—energy; viddhi—just try to understand; me—My; paräm—superior;
jéva-bhütäm—comprising the living entities; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed
one; yayä—by whom; idam—this; dhäryate—is utilized or exploited; jagat—the
material world.

TRANSLATION

Besides these, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another, superior energy of

Mine, which comprises the living entities who are exploiting the resources of
this material, inferior nature.

PURPORT

Here  it  is  clearly  mentioned  that  living  entities  belong  to  the  superior
nature  (or  energy)  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  inferior  energy  is  matter
manifested  in  different  elements,  namely  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  ether,  mind,
intelligence and false ego. Both forms of material nature, namely gross (earth,
etc.)  and  subtle  (mind,  etc.),  are  products  of  the  inferior  energy.  The  living
entities,  who  are  exploiting  these  inferior  energies  for  different  purposes,  are
the superior energy of the Supreme Lord, and it is due to this energy that the
entire material world functions. The cosmic manifestation has no power to act
unless it is moved by the superior energy, the living entity. Energies are always
controlled  by  the  energetic,  and  therefore  the  living  entities  are  always
controlled by the Lord—they have no independent existence. They are never
equally  powerful,  as  unintelligent  men  think.  The  distinction  between  the
living  entities  and  the  Lord  is  described  in Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (10.87.30)  as
follows:

aparimitä dhruväs tanu-bhåto yadi sarva-gatäs
tarhi na çäsyateti niyamo dhruva netarathä
ajani ca yan-mayaà tad avimucya niyantå bhavet
samam anujänatäà yad amataà mata-duñöatayä

“O  Supreme  Eternal!  If  the  embodied  living  entities  were  eternal  and
all-pervading like You, then they would not be under Your control. But if the
living entities are accepted as minute energies of Your Lordship, then they are
at  once  subject  to  Your  supreme  control.  Therefore  real  liberation  entails
surrender by the living entities to Your control, and that surrender will make
them  happy.  In  that  constitutional  position  only  can  they  be  controllers.
Therefore, men with limited knowledge who advocate the monistic theory that
God  and  the  living  entities  are  equal  in  all  respects  are  actually  guided  by  a

faulty and polluted opinion.”

The Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, is the only controller, and all living entities are
controlled  by  Him.  These  living  entities  are  His  superior  energy  because  the
quality of their existence is one and the same with the Supreme, but they are
never equal to the Lord in quantity of power. While exploiting the gross and
subtle inferior energy (matter), the superior energy (the living entity) forgets
his  real  spiritual  mind  and  intelligence.  This  forgetfulness  is  due  to  the
influence of matter upon the living entity. But when the living entity becomes
free  from  the  influence  of  the  illusory  material  energy,  he  attains  the  stage
called  mukti,  or  liberation.  The  false  ego,  under  the  influence  of  material
illusion,  thinks,  “I  am  matter,  and  material acquisitions are mine.” His actual
position is realized when he is liberated from all material ideas, including the
conception of his becoming one in all respects with God. Therefore one may
conclude  that  the  Gétä  confirms  the  living  entity  to  be  only  one  of  the
multi-energies  of  Kåñëa;  and  when  this  energy  is  freed  from  material
contamination, it becomes fully Kåñëa conscious, or liberated.

TEXT  6

WTaÛaeNaqiNa >aUTaaiNa SavaR<aqTYauPaDaarYa )

Ah& k*-TòSYa JaGaTa" Pa[>av" Pa[l/YaSTaQaa )) 6 ))

etad-yonéni bhütäni
sarväëéty upadhäraya
ahaà kåtsnasya jagataù
prabhavaù pralayas tathä

SYNONYMS

etat—these two natures; yonéni—whose source of birth; bhütäni—everything
created; sarväëi—all; iti—thus; upadhäraya—know; aham—I;
kåtsnasya—all-inclusive; jagataù—of the world; prabhavaù—the source of
manifestation; pralayaù—annihilation; tathä—as well as.

TRANSLATION

All created beings have their source in these two natures. Of all that is
material and all that is spiritual in this world, know for certain that I am both
the origin and the dissolution.

PURPORT

Everything  that  exists  is  a  product  of  matter  and  spirit.  Spirit  is  the  basic
field  of  creation,  and  matter  is  created  by  spirit.  Spirit  is  not  created  at  a
certain  stage  of  material  development.  Rather,  this  material  world  is
manifested  only  on  the  basis  of  spiritual  energy.  This  material  body  is
developed  because  spirit  is  present  within  matter;  a  child  grows  gradually  to
boyhood  and  then  to  manhood  because  that  superior  energy,  spirit  soul,  is
present. Similarly, the entire cosmic manifestation of the gigantic universe is
developed  because  of  the  presence  of  the  Supersoul,  Viñëu.  Therefore  spirit
and  matter,  which  combine  to  manifest  this  gigantic  universal  form,  are
originally two energies of the Lord, and consequently the Lord is the original
cause  of  everything.  A  fragmental  part  and  parcel  of  the  Lord,  namely  the
living entity, may be the cause of a big skyscraper, a big factory, or even a big
city, but he cannot be the cause of a big universe. The cause of the big universe
is the big soul, or the Supersoul. And Kåñëa, the Supreme, is the cause of both
the big and small souls. Therefore He is the original cause of all causes. This is
confirmed in the Kaöha Upaniñad (2.2.13). Nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm.

TEXT  7

Mata" ParTar& NaaNYaiTk-iÄdiSTa DaNaÅYa )

MaiYa SavRiMad& Pa[aeTa& SaU}ae Mai<aGa<aa wv )) 7 ))

mattaù parataraà nänyat
kiïcid asti dhanaïjaya
mayi sarvam idaà protaà

sütre maëi-gaëä iva

SYNONYMS

mattaù—beyond Me; para-taram—superior; na—not; anyat kiïcit—anything
else; asti—there is; dhanaïjaya—O conqueror of wealth; mayi—in Me;
sarvam—all that be; idam—which we see; protam—is strung; sütre—on a
thread; maëi-gaëäù—pearls; iva—like.

TRANSLATION

O conqueror of wealth, there is no truth superior to Me. Everything rests

upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.

PURPORT

éçvaraù 

affirmation  of 

the  Brahma-saàhitä: 

There is a common controversy over whether the Supreme Absolute Truth
is personal or impersonal. As far as Bhagavad-gétä is concerned, the Absolute
Truth is the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, and this is confirmed in every
step.  In  this  verse,  in  particular,  it  is  stressed  that  the  Absolute  Truth  is  a
person. That the Personality of Godhead is the Supreme Absolute Truth is also
the 
paramaù  kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù;  that  is,  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth  Personality  of
Godhead is Lord Kåñëa, who is the primeval Lord, the reservoir of all pleasure,
Govinda,  and  the  eternal  form  of  complete  bliss  and  knowledge.  These
authorities leave no doubt that the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person, the
cause of all causes. The impersonalist, however, argues on the strength of the
Vedic version given in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (3.10): tato yad uttarataraà
tad  arüpam  anämayam/  ya  etad  vidur  amåtäs  te  bhavanti  athetare  duùkham
eväpiyanti.  “In  the  material  world  Brahmä,  the  primeval  living  entity  within
the  universe,  is  understood  to  be  the  supreme  amongst  the  demigods,  human
beings  and  lower  animals.  But  beyond  Brahmä  there  is  the  Transcendence,
who  has  no  material  form  and  is  free  from  all  material  contaminations.
Anyone  who  can  know  Him  also  becomes  transcendental,  but  those  who  do

not know Him suffer the miseries of the material world.”

The impersonalist puts more stress on the word arüpam. But this arüpam is
not  impersonal.  It  indicates  the  transcendental  form  of  eternity,  bliss  and
knowledge as described in the Brahma-saàhitä quoted above. Other verses in
the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (3.8–9) substantiate this as follows:

vedäham etaà puruñaà mahäntam
äditya-varëaà tamasaù parastät
tam eva viditväti måtyum eti
nänyaù panthä vidyate ’yanäya

yasmät paraà näparam asti kiïcid
yasmän näëéyo no jyäyo ’sti kiïcit
våkña iva stabdho divi tiñöhaty ekas
tenedaà pürëaà puruñeëa sarvam

“I know that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is transcendental to all
material conceptions of darkness. Only he who knows Him can transcend the
bonds  of  birth  and  death.  There  is  no  way  for  liberation  other  than  this
knowledge of that Supreme Person.

“There  is  no  truth  superior  to  that  Supreme  Person,  because  He  is  the
supermost. He is smaller than the smallest, and He is greater than the greatest.
He is situated as a silent tree, and He illumines the transcendental sky, and as
a tree spreads its roots, He spreads His extensive energies.”

From  these  verses  one  concludes  that  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth  is  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is  all-pervading  by  His  multi-energies,
both material and spiritual.

TEXT  8

rSaae_hMaPSau k-aENTaeYa Pa[>aaiSMa XaiXaSaUYaRYaae" )

Pa[<av" SavRvedezu XaBd" %e PaaEåz& Na*zu )) 8 ))

raso ’ham apsu kaunteya

prabhäsmi çaçi-süryayoù
praëavaù sarva-vedeñu
çabdaù khe pauruñaà nåñu

SYNONYMS

rasaù—taste; aham—I; apsu—in water; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
prabhä—the light; asmi—I am; çaçi-süryayoù—of the moon and the sun;
praëavaù—the three letters a-u-m; sarva—in all; vedeñu—the Vedas;
çabdaù—sound vibration; khe—in the ether; pauruñam—ability; nåñu—in
men.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunté, I am the taste of water, the light of the sun and the moon,

the syllable oà in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in ether and ability in
man.

PURPORT

This  verse  explains  how  the  Lord  is  all-pervasive  by  His  diverse  material
and  spiritual  energies.  The  Supreme  Lord  can  be  preliminarily  perceived  by
His  different  energies,  and  in  this  way  He  is  realized  impersonally.  As  the
demigod in the sun is a person and is perceived by his all-pervading energy, the
sunshine,  so  the  Lord,  although  in  His  eternal  abode,  is  perceived  by  His
all-pervading  diffusive  energies.  The  taste  of  water  is  the  active  principle  of
water. No one likes to drink sea water, because the pure taste of water is mixed
with salt. Attraction for water depends on the purity of the taste, and this pure
taste  is  one  of  the  energies  of  the  Lord.  The  impersonalist  perceives  the
presence of the Lord in water by its taste, and the personalist also glorifies the
Lord for His kindly supplying tasty water to quench man’s thirst. That is the
way  of  perceiving  the  Supreme.  Practically  speaking,  there  is  no  conflict
between personalism and impersonalism. One who knows God knows that the
impersonal conception and personal conception are simultaneously present in

everything  and  that  there  is  no  contradiction.  Therefore  Lord  Caitanya
established 
acintya
sublime 
bheda-and-abheda-tattva—simultaneous oneness and difference.

doctrine: 

His 

The  light  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  is  also  originally  emanating  from  the
brahmajyoti, which is the impersonal effulgence of the Lord. And praëava, or
the  oàkära  transcendental  sound  in  the  beginning  of  every  Vedic  hymn,
addresses the Supreme Lord. Because the impersonalists are very much afraid
of addressing the Supreme Lord Kåñëa by His innumerable names, they prefer
to  vibrate  the  transcendental  sound  oàkära.  But  they  do  not  realize  that
oàkära  is  the  sound  representation  of  Kåñëa.  The  jurisdiction  of  Kåñëa
consciousness extends everywhere, and one who knows Kåñëa consciousness is
blessed.  Those  who  do  not  know  Kåñëa  are  in  illusion,  and  so  knowledge  of
Kåñëa is liberation, and ignorance of Him is bondage.

TEXT  9

Pau<Yaae GaNDa" Pa*iQaVYaa& c TaeJaêaiSMa iv>aavSaaE )

JaqvNa& SavR>aUTaezu TaPaêaiSMa TaPaiSvzu )) 9 ))

puëyo gandhaù påthivyäà ca
tejaç cäsmi vibhävasau
jévanaà sarva-bhüteñu
tapaç cäsmi tapasviñu

SYNONYMS

puëyaù—original; gandhaù—fragrance; påthivyäm—in the earth; ca—also;
tejaù—heat; ca—also; asmi—I am; vibhävasau—in the fire; jévanam—life;
sarva—in all; bhüteñu—living entities; tapaù—penance; ca—also; asmi—I am;
tapasviñu—in those who practice penance.

TRANSLATION

I am the original fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I am the

life of all that lives, and I am the penances of all ascetics.

PURPORT

Puëya means that which is not decomposed; puëya is original. Everything in
the material world has a certain flavor or fragrance, as the flavor and fragrance
in a flower, or in the earth, in water, in fire, in air, etc. The uncontaminated
flavor,  the  original  flavor,  which  permeates  everything,  is  Kåñëa.  Similarly,
everything has a particular original taste, and this taste can be changed by the
mixture  of  chemicals.  So  everything  original  has  some  smell,  some  fragrance,
and some taste. Vibhävasu means fire. Without fire we cannot run factories, we
cannot  cook,  etc.,  and  that  fire  is  Kåñëa.  The  heat  in  the  fire  is  Kåñëa.
According  to  Vedic  medicine,  indigestion  is  due  to  a  low  temperature  in  the
belly. So even for digestion fire is needed. In Kåñëa consciousness we become
aware that earth, water, fire, air and every active principle, all chemicals and
all material elements are due to Kåñëa. The duration of man’s life is also due to
Kåñëa. Therefore by the grace of Kåñëa, man can prolong his life or diminish
it. So Kåñëa consciousness is active in every sphere.

TEXT  10

bqJa& Maa& SavR>aUTaaNaa& iviÖ PaaQaR SaNaaTaNaMa( )

buiÖbuRiÖMaTaaMaiSMa TaeJaSTaeJaiSvNaaMahMa( )) 10 ))

béjaà mäà sarva-bhütänäà
viddhi pärtha sanätanam
buddhir buddhimatäm asmi
tejas tejasvinäm aham

SYNONYMS

béjam—the seed; mäm—Me; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities;
viddhi—try to understand; pärtha—O son of Påthä; sanätanam—original,
eternal; buddhiù—intelligence; buddhi-matäm—of the intelligent; asmi—I am;

tejaù—prowess; tejasvinäm—of the powerful; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the

intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.

PURPORT

Béjam means seed; Kåñëa is the seed of everything. There are various living
entities, movable and inert. Birds, beasts, men and many other living creatures
are moving living entities; trees and plants, however, are inert—they cannot
move, but only stand. Every entity is contained within the scope of 8,400,000
species  of  life;  some  of  them  are  moving  and  some  of  them  are  inert.  In  all
cases,  however,  the  seed  of  their  life  is  Kåñëa.  As  stated  in  Vedic  literature,
Brahman,  or  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth,  is  that  from  which  everything  is
emanating. Kåñëa is Parabrahman, the Supreme Spirit. Brahman is impersonal
and Parabrahman is personal. Impersonal Brahman is situated in the personal
aspect—that  is  stated  in  Bhagavad-gétä.  Therefore,  originally,  Kåñëa  is  the
source of everything. He is the root. As the root of a tree maintains the whole
tree, Kåñëa, being the original root of all things, maintains everything in this
material  manifestation.  This  is  also  confirmed  in  the  Vedic  literature  (Kaöha
Upaniñad 2.2.13):

nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm
eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän

He is the prime eternal among all eternals. He is the supreme living entity
of  all  living  entities,  and  He  alone  is  maintaining  all  life.  One  cannot  do
anything  without  intelligence,  and  Kåñëa  also  says  that  He  is  the  root  of  all
intelligence. Unless a person is intelligent he cannot understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.

TEXT  11

bl&/ bl/vTaa& cah& k-aMaraGaivviJaRTaMa( )

DaMaaRivåÖae >aUTaezu k-aMaae_iSMa >arTazR>a )) 11 ))

balaà balavatäà cähaà
käma-räga-vivarjitam
dharmäviruddho bhüteñu
kämo ’smi bharatarñabha

SYNONYMS

balam—strength; bala-vatäm—of the strong; ca—and; aham—I am;
käma—passion; räga—and attachment; vivarjitam—devoid of;
dharma-aviruddhaù—not against religious principles; bhüteñu—in all beings;
kämaù—sex life; asmi—I am; bharata-åñabha—O lord of the Bhäratas.

TRANSLATION

I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex life
which is not contrary to religious principles, O lord of the Bhäratas [Arjuna].

PURPORT

The  strong  man’s  strength  should  be  applied  to  protect  the  weak,  not  for
personal  aggression.  Similarly,  sex  life,  according  to  religious  principles
(dharma),  should  be  for  the  propagation  of  children,  not  otherwise.  The
responsibility of parents is then to make their offspring Kåñëa conscious.

TEXT  12

Yae cEv Saaitvk-a >aava raJaSaaSTaaMaSaaê Yae )

Mata WveiTa TaaiNviÖ Na Tvh& Taezu Tae MaiYa )) 12 ))

ye caiva sättvikä bhävä
räjasäs tämasäç ca ye

matta eveti tän viddhi
na tv ahaà teñu te mayi

SYNONYMS

ye—all which; ca—and; eva—certainly; sättvikäù—in goodness;
bhäväù—states of being; räjasäù—in the mode of passion; tämasäù—in the
mode of ignorance; ca—also; ye—all which; mattaù—from Me; eva—certainly;
iti—thus; tän—those; viddhi—try to know; na—not; tu—but; aham—I;
teñu—in them; te—they; mayi—in Me.

TRANSLATION

Know that all states of being—be they of goodness, passion or

ignorance—are manifested by My energy. I am, in one sense, everything, but I
am independent. I am not under the modes of material nature, for they, on the
contrary, are within Me.

PURPORT

All  material  activities  in  the  world  are  being  conducted  under  the  three
modes  of  material  nature.  Although  these  material  modes  of  nature  are
emanations  from  the  Supreme  Lord,  Kåñëa,  He  is  not  subject  to  them.  For
instance,  under  the  state  laws  one  may  be  punished,  but  the  king,  the
lawmaker,  is  not  subject  to  that  law.  Similarly,  all  the  modes  of  material
nature—goodness, passion and ignorance—are emanations from the Supreme
Lord,  Kåñëa,  but  Kåñëa  is  not  subject  to  material  nature.  Therefore  He  is
nirguëa, which means that these guëas, or modes, although issuing from Him,
do  not  affect  Him.  That  is  one  of  the  special  characteristics  of  Bhagavän,  or
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  13

i}ai>aGauR<aMaYaE>aaRvErei>a" SavRiMad& JaGaTa( )

MaaeihTa& Naai>aJaaNaaiTa MaaMae>Ya" ParMaVYaYaMa( )) 13 ))

tribhir guëa-mayair bhävair
ebhiù sarvam idaà jagat
mohitaà näbhijänäti
mäm ebhyaù param avyayam

SYNONYMS

tribhiù—three; guëa-mayaiù—consisting of the guëas; bhävaiù—by the states
of being; ebhiù—all these; sarvam—whole; idam—this; jagat—universe;
mohitam—deluded; na abhijänäti—does not know; mäm—Me; ebhyaù—above
these; param—the Supreme; avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

Deluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the whole

world does not know Me, who am above the modes and inexhaustible.

PURPORT

The  whole  world  is  enchanted  by  three  modes  of  material  nature.  Those
who  are  bewildered  by  these  three  modes  cannot  understand  that
transcendental to this material nature is the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa.

Every living entity under the influence of material nature has a particular
type  of  body  and  a  particular  type  of  psychological  and  biological  activities
accordingly.  There  are  four  classes  of  men  functioning  in  the  three  material
modes  of  nature.  Those  who  are  purely  in  the  mode  of  goodness  are  called
brähmaëas. Those who are purely in the mode of passion are called kñatriyas.
Those who are in the modes of both passion and ignorance are called vaiçyas.
Those who are completely in ignorance are called çüdras. And those who are
less than that are animals or animal life. However, these designations are not
permanent. I may either be a brähmaëa, kñatriya. vaiçya or whatever—in any
case, this life is temporary. But although life is temporary and we do not know

what we are going to be in the next life, by the spell of this illusory energy we
consider ourselves in terms of this bodily conception of life, and we thus think
that we are American, Indian, Russian, or brähmaëa. Hindu, Muslim, etc. And
if we become entangled with the modes of material nature, then we forget the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is behind all these modes. So Lord Kåñëa
says  that  living  entities  deluded  by  these  three  modes  of  nature  do  not
understand that behind the material background is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

There are many different kinds of living entities—human beings, demigods,
animals,  etc.—and  each  and  every  one  of  them  is  under  the  influence  of
material nature, and all of them have forgotten the transcendent Personality
of Godhead. Those who are in the modes of passion and ignorance, and even
those  who  are  in  the  mode  of  goodness,  cannot  go  beyond  the  impersonal
Brahman  conception  of  the  Absolute  Truth.  They  are  bewildered  before  the
Supreme  Lord  in  His  personal  feature,  which  possesses  all  beauty,  opulence,
knowledge,  strength,  fame  and  renunciation.  When  even  those  who  are  in
goodness  cannot  understand,  what  hope  is  there  for  those  in  passion  and
ignorance?  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  transcendental  to  all  these  three  modes  of
material  nature,  and  those  who  are  truly  established  in  Kåñëa  consciousness
are actually liberated.

TEXT  14

dEvq ùeza Gau<aMaYaq MaMa MaaYaa durTYaYaa )

MaaMaev Yae Pa[PaÛNTae MaaYaaMaeTaa& TariNTa Tae )) 14 ))

daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te

SYNONYMS

daivé—transcendental; hi—certainly; eñä—this; guëa-mayé—consisting of the
three modes of material nature; mama—My; mäyä—energy; duratyayä—very
difficult to overcome; mäm—unto Me; eva—certainly; ye—those who;
prapadyante—surrender; mäyäm etäm—this illusory energy;
taranti—overcome; te—they.

TRANSLATION

This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature,

is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily
cross beyond it.

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  has  innumerable  energies,  and  all
these energies are divine. Although the living entities are part of His energies
and  are  therefore  divine,  due  to  contact  with  material  energy  their  original
superior power is covered. Being thus covered by material energy, one cannot
possibly  overcome  its  influence.  As  previously  stated,  both  the  material  and
spiritual natures, being emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
are  eternal.  The  living  entities  belong  to  the  eternal  superior  nature  of  the
Lord, but due to contamination by the inferior nature, matter, their illusion is
also eternal. The conditioned soul is therefore called nitya-baddha, or eternally
conditioned. No one can trace out the history of his becoming conditioned at a
certain date in material history. Consequently, his release from the clutches of
material  nature  is  very  difficult,  even  though  that  material  nature  is  an
inferior  energy,  because  material  energy  is  ultimately  conducted  by  the
supreme  will,  which  the  living  entity  cannot  overcome.  Inferior,  material
nature  is  defined  herein  as  divine  nature  due  to  its  divine  connection  and
movement by the divine will. Being conducted by divine will, material nature,
although  inferior,  acts  so  wonderfully  in  the  construction  and  destruction  of
the  cosmic  manifestation.  The  Vedas  confirm  this  as  follows:  mäyäà  tu
prakåtià vidyän mäyinaà tu maheçvaram. “Although mäyä [illusion] is false or
temporary, the background of mäyä is the supreme magician, the Personality of

Godhead, who is Maheçvara, the supreme controller.” (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad
4.10)

Another  meaning  of  guëa  is  rope;  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the
conditioned  soul  is  tightly  tied  by  the  ropes  of  illusion.  A  man  bound  by  the
hands  and  feet  cannot  free  himself—he  must  be  helped  by  a  person  who  is
unbound.  Because  the  bound  cannot  help  the  bound,  the  rescuer  must  be
liberated.  Therefore,  only  Lord  Kåñëa,  or  His  bona  fide  representative  the
spiritual master, can release the conditioned soul. Without such superior help,
one cannot be freed from the bondage of material nature. Devotional service,
or Kåñëa consciousness, can help one gain such release. Kåñëa, being the Lord
of  illusory  energy,  can  order  this  insurmountable  energy  to  release  the
conditioned  soul.  He  orders  this  release  out  of  His  causeless  mercy  on  the
surrendered soul and out of His paternal affection for the living entity, who is
originally a beloved son of the Lord. Therefore surrender unto the lotus feet of
the  Lord  is  the  only  means  to  get  free  from  the  clutches  of  the  stringent
material nature.

The  words  mäm  eva  are  also  significant.  Mäm  means  unto  Kåñëa  (Viñëu)
only, and not Brahmä or Çiva. Although Brahmä and Çiva are greatly elevated
and are almost on the level of Viñëu, it is not possible for such incarnations of
rajo-guëa (passion) and tamo-guëa (ignorance) to release the conditioned soul
from  the  clutches  of  mäyä.  In  other  words,  both  Brahmä  and  Çiva  are  also
under the influence of mäyä. Only Viñëu is the master of mäyä; therefore He
alone  can  give  release  to  the  conditioned  soul.  The  Vedas  (Çvetäçvatara
Upaniñad  3.8)  confirm  this  in  the  phrase  tam  eva  viditvä.  or  “Freedom  is
possible only by understanding Kåñëa.” Even Lord Çiva affirms that liberation
can  be  achieved  only  by  the  mercy  of  Viñëu.  Lord  Çiva  says,  mukti-pradätä
sarveñäà viñëur eva na saàçayaù: “There is no doubt that Viñëu is the deliverer
of liberation for everyone.”

TEXT  15

Na Maa& duZk*-iTaNaae MaU!a" Pa[PaÛNTae NaraDaMaa" )

MaaYaYaaPaôTajaNaa AaSaur& >aavMaaié[Taa" )) 15 ))

na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù

SYNONYMS

na—not; mäm—unto Me; duñkåtinaù—miscreants; müòhäù—foolish;
prapadyante—surrender; nara-adhamäù—lowest among mankind; mäyayä—by
the illusory energy; apahåta—stolen; jïänäù—whose knowledge;
äsuram—demonic; bhävam—nature; äçritäù—accepting.

TRANSLATION

Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, who are lowest among mankind,
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature
of demons do not surrender unto Me.

PURPORT

It is said in Bhagavad-gétä that simply by surrendering oneself unto the lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality Kåñëa one can surmount the stringent laws of
material  nature.  At  this  point  a  question  arises:  How  is  it  that  educated
philosophers,  scientists,  businessmen,  administrators  and  all  the  leaders  of
ordinary men do not surrender to the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa, the all-powerful
Personality of Godhead? Mukti, or liberation from the laws of material nature,
is sought by the leaders of mankind in different ways and with great plans and
perseverance for a great many years and births. But if that liberation is possible
by  simply  surrendering  unto  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, then why don’t these intelligent and hard-working leaders adopt this
simple method?

The Gétä answers this question very frankly. Those really learned leaders of

society  like  Brahmä,  Çiva,  Kapila,  the  Kumäras,  Manu,  Vyäsa,  Devala,  Asita,
Janaka,  Prahläda,  Bali,  and  later  on  Madhväcärya,  Rämänujäcärya,  Çré
Caitanya  and  many  others—who  are  faithful  philosophers,  politicians,
educators, scientists, etc.—surrender to the lotus feet of the Supreme Person,
the all-powerful authority. Those who are not actually philosophers, scientists,
educators,  administrators,  etc.,  but  who  pose  themselves  as  such  for  material
gain, do not accept the plan or path of the Supreme Lord. They have no idea
of  God;  they  simply  manufacture  their  own  worldly  plans  and  consequently
complicate the problems of material existence in their vain attempts to solve
them.  Because  material  energy  (nature)  is  so  powerful,  it  can  resist  the
unauthorized  plans  of  the  atheists  and  baffle  the  knowledge  of  “planning
commissions.”

The  atheistic  planmakers  are  described  herein  by  the  word  duñkåtinaù,  or
“miscreants.” Kåté means one who has performed meritorious work. The atheist
planmaker  is  sometimes  very  intelligent  and  meritorious  also,  because  any
gigantic plan, good or bad, must take intelligence to execute. But because the
atheist’s brain is improperly utilized in opposing the plan of the Supreme Lord,
the atheistic planmaker is called duñkåté. which indicates that his intelligence
and efforts are misdirected.

In  the  Gétä  it  is  clearly  mentioned  that  material  energy  works  fully  under
the direction of the Supreme Lord. It has no independent authority. It works
as  the  shadow  moves,  in  accordance  with  the  movements  of  the  object.  But
still  material  energy  is  very  powerful,  and  the  atheist,  due  to  his  godless
temperament,  cannot  know  how  it  works;  nor  can  he  know  the  plan  of  the
Supreme Lord. Under illusion and the modes of passion and ignorance, all his
plans  are  baffled,  as  in  the  case  of  Hiraëyakaçipu  and  Rävaëa,  whose  plans
were smashed to dust although they were both materially learned as scientists,
philosophers,  administrators  and  educators.  These  duñkåtinas,  or  miscreants,
are of four different patterns, as outlined below.

(1) The müòhas are those who are grossly foolish, like hardworking beasts of
burden. They want to enjoy the fruits of their labor by themselves, and so do
not want to part with them for the Supreme. The typical example of the beast
of  burden  is  the  ass.  This  humble  beast  is  made  to  work  very  hard  by  his

master. The ass does not really know for whom he works so hard day and night.
He remains satisfied by filling his stomach with a bundle of grass, sleeping for a
while under fear of being beaten by his master, and satisfying his sex appetite
at  the  risk  of  being  repeatedly  kicked  by  the  opposite  party.  The  ass  sings
poetry and philosophy sometimes, but this braying sound only disturbs others.
This is the position of the foolish fruitive worker who does not know for whom
he  should  work.  He  does  not  know  that  karma  (action)  is  meant  for  yajïa
(sacrifice).

Most often, those who work very hard day and night to clear the burden of
self-created duties say that they have no time to hear of the immortality of the
living being. To such müòhas, material gains, which are destructible, are life’s
all in all—despite the fact that the müòhas enjoy only a very small fraction of
the fruit of labor. Sometimes they spend sleepless days and nights for fruitive
gain, and although they may have ulcers or indigestion, they are satisfied with
practically no food; they are simply absorbed in working hard day and night for
the  benefit  of  illusory  masters.  Ignorant  of  their  real  master,  the  foolish
workers waste their valuable time serving mammon. Unfortunately, they never
surrender to the supreme master of all masters, nor do they take time to hear of
Him from the proper sources. The swine who eat the night soil do not care to
accept  sweetmeats  made  of  sugar  and  ghee.  Similarly,  the  foolish  worker  will
untiringly  continue  to  hear  of  the  sense-enjoyable  tidings  of  the  flickering
mundane world, but will have very little time to hear about the eternal living
force that moves the material world.

(2)  Another  class  of  duñkåté,  or  miscreant,  is  called  the  narädhama,  or  the
lowest of mankind. Nara means human being, and adhama means the lowest.
Out  of  the  8,400,000  different  species  of  living  beings,  there  are  400,000
human  species.  Out  of  these  there  are  numerous  lower  forms  of  human  life
that  are  mostly  uncivilized.  The  civilized  human  beings  are  those  who  have
regulative  principles  of  social,  political  and  religious  life.  Those  who  are
socially and politically developed but who have no religious principles must be
considered  narädhamas.  Nor  is  religion  without  God  religion,  because  the
purpose  of  following  religious  principles  is  to  know  the  Supreme  Truth  and
man’s relation with Him. In the Gétä the Personality of Godhead clearly states

that there is no authority above Him and that He is the Supreme Truth. The
civilized form of human life is meant for man’s reviving the lost consciousness of
his  eternal  relation  with  the  Supreme  Truth,  the  Personality  of  Godhead  Çré
Kåñëa,  who  is  all-powerful.  Whoever  loses  this  chance  is  classified  as  a
narädhama. We get information from revealed scriptures that when the baby is
in the mother’s womb (an extremely uncomfortable situation) he prays to God
for deliverance and promises to worship Him alone as soon as he gets out. To
pray to God when he is in difficulty is a natural instinct in every living being
because  he  is  eternally  related  with  God.  But  after  his  deliverance,  the  child
forgets the difficulties of birth and forgets his deliverer also, being influenced
by mäyä, the illusory energy.

It is the duty of the guardians of children to revive the divine consciousness
dormant in them. The ten processes of reformatory ceremonies, as enjoined in
the  Manu-småti.  which  is  the  guide  to  religious  principles,  are  meant  for
reviving God consciousness in the system of varëäçrama. However, no process
is strictly followed now in any part of the world, and therefore 99.9 percent of
the population is narädhama.

When  the  whole  population  becomes  narädhama.  naturally  all  their
so-called  education  is  made  null  and  void  by  the  all-powerful  energy  of
physical  nature.  According  to  the  standard  of  the  Gétä,  a  learned  man  is  he
who sees on equal terms the learned brähmaëa. the dog. the cow, the elephant
and the dog-eater. That is the vision of a true devotee. Çré Nityänanda Prabhu,
who  is  the  incarnation  of  Godhead  as  divine  master,  delivered  the  typical
narädhamas.  the  brothers  Jagäi  and  Mädhäi,  and  showed  how  the  mercy  of  a
real devotee is bestowed upon the lowest of mankind. So the narädhama who is
condemned  by  the  Personality  of  Godhead  can  again  revive  his  spiritual
consciousness only by the mercy of a devotee.

Çré  Caitanya  Mahäprabhu,  in  propagating  the  bhägavata-dharma,  or
activities of the devotees, has recommended that people submissively hear the
message  of  the  Personality  of  Godhead.  The  essence  of  this  message  is
Bhagavad-gétä.  The  lowest  amongst  human  beings  can  be  delivered  by  this
submissive hearing process only, but unfortunately they even refuse to give an
aural reception to these messages, and what to speak of surrendering to the will

of the Supreme Lord? Narädhamas, or the lowest of mankind, will fully neglect
the prime duty of the human being.

(3) The next class of duñkåté is called mäyayäpahåta-jïänäù, or those persons
whose  erudite  knowledge  has  been  nullified  by  the  influence  of  illusory
material  energy.  They  are  mostly  very  learned  fellows—great  philosophers,
poets,  literati,  scientists,  etc.—but  the  illusory  energy  misguides  them,  and
therefore they disobey the Supreme Lord.

There are a great number of mäyayäpahåta-jïänäù at the present moment,
even  amongst  the  scholars  of  the  Bhagavad-gétä.  In  the  Gétä,  in  plain  and
simple  language,  it  is  stated  that  Çré  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead. There is none equal to or greater than Him. He is mentioned as the
father of Brahmä, the original father of all human beings. In fact, Çré Kåñëa is
said to be not only the father of Brahmä but also the father of all species of life.
He  is  the  root  of  the  impersonal  Brahman  and  Paramätmä;  the  Supersoul  in
every entity is His plenary portion. He is the fountainhead of everything, and
everyone  is  advised  to  surrender  unto  His  lotus  feet.  Despite  all  these  clear
statements,  the  mäyayäpahåta-jïänäù  deride  the  personality  of  the  Supreme
Lord and consider Him merely another human being. They do not know that
the blessed form of human life is designed after the eternal and transcendental
feature of the Supreme Lord.

All  the  unauthorized  interpretations  of  the  Gétä  by  the  class  of
mäyayäpahåta-jïänäù,  outside  the  purview  of  the  paramparä  system,  are  so
many  stumbling  blocks  on  the  path  of  spiritual  understanding.  The  deluded
interpreters  do  not  surrender  unto  the  lotus  feet  of  Çré  Kåñëa,  nor  do  they
teach others to follow this principle.

(4)  The  last  class  of  duñkåté  is  called  äsuraà  bhävam  äçritäù,  or  those  of
demonic principles. This class is openly atheistic. Some of them argue that the
Supreme Lord can never descend upon this material world, but they are unable
to  give  any  tangible  reasons  as  to  why  not.  There  are  others  who  make  Him
subordinate to the impersonal feature, although the opposite is declared in the
Gétä. Envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the atheist will present
a number of illicit incarnations manufactured in the factory of his brain. Such
persons,  whose  very  principle  of  life  is  to  decry  the  Personality  of  Godhead,

cannot surrender unto the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa.

Çré  Yämunäcärya  Albandaru  of  South  India  said,  “O  my  Lord!  You  are
unknowable  to  persons  involved  with  atheistic  principles,  despite  Your
uncommon  qualities,  features  and  activities,  despite  Your  personality’s  being
confirmed by all the revealed scriptures in the quality of goodness, and despite
Your being acknowledged by the famous authorities renowned for their depth
of  knowledge  in  the  transcendental  science  and  situated  in  the  godly
qualities.”

Therefore,  (1)  grossly  foolish  persons,  (2)  the  lowest  of  mankind,  (3)  the
deluded speculators, and (4) the professed atheists, as above mentioned, never
surrender  unto  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Personality  of  Godhead  in  spite  of  all
scriptural and authoritative advice.

TEXT  16

cTauivRDaa >aJaNTae Maa& JaNaa" Sauk*-iTaNaae_JauRNa )

AaTaaeR iJajaSaurQaaRQas jaNaq c >arTazR>a )) 16 ))

catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino ’rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha

SYNONYMS

catuù-vidhäù—four kinds of; bhajante—render services; mäm—unto Me;
janäù—persons; su-kåtinaù—those who are pious; arjuna—O Arjuna;
ärtaù—the distressed; jijïäsuù—the inquisitive; artha-arthé—one who desires
material gain; jïäné—one who knows things as they are; ca—also;
bharata-åñabha—O great one amongst the descendants of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O best among the Bhäratas, four kinds of pious men begin to render

devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the
inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.

PURPORT

Unlike  the  miscreants,  these  are  adherents  of  the  regulative  principles  of
the scriptures, and they are called sukåtinaù, or those who obey the rules and
regulations  of  scriptures,  the  moral  and  social  laws,  and  are,  more  or  less,
devoted  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  Out  of  these  there  are  four  classes  of
men—those  who  are  sometimes  distressed,  those  who  are  in  need  of  money,
those  who  are  sometimes  inquisitive,  and  those  who  are  sometimes  searching
after  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth.  These  persons  come  to  the  Supreme
Lord  for  devotional  service  under  different  conditions.  These  are  not  pure
devotees,  because  they  have  some  aspiration  to  fulfill  in  exchange  for
devotional  service.  Pure  devotional  service  is  without  aspiration  and  without
desire  for  material  profit.  The  Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu  (1.1.11)  defines  pure
devotion thus:

anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänu-
çélanaà bhaktir uttamä
 [Madhya 19.167]

“One  should  render  transcendental  loving  service  to  the  Supreme  Lord
Kåñëa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service.”

When these four kinds of persons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional
service and are completely purified by the association of a pure devotee, they
also  become  pure  devotees.  As  far  as  the  miscreants  are  concerned,  for  them
devotional service is very difficult because their lives are selfish, irregular and
without spiritual goals. But even some of them, by chance, when they come in
contact with a pure devotee, also become pure devotees.

Those  who  are  always  busy  with  fruitive  activities  come  to  the  Lord  in

material distress and at that time associate with pure devotees and become, in
their distress, devotees of the Lord. Those who are simply frustrated also come
sometimes to associate with the pure devotees and become inquisitive to know
about God. Similarly, when the dry philosophers are frustrated in every field of
knowledge,  they  sometimes  want  to  learn  of  God,  and  they  come  to  the
Supreme  Lord  to  render  devotional  service  and  thus  transcend  knowledge  of
the  impersonal  Brahman  and  the  localized  Paramätmä  and  come  to  the
personal conception of Godhead by the grace of the Supreme Lord or His pure
devotee.  On  the  whole,  when  the  distressed,  the  inquisitive,  the  seekers  of
knowledge,  and  those  who  are  in  need  of  money  are  free  from  all  material
desires,  and  when  they  fully  understand  that  material  remuneration  has
nothing to do with spiritual improvement, they become pure devotees. As long
as  such  a  purified  stage  is  not  attained,  devotees  in transcendental service to
the  Lord  are  tainted  with  fruitive  activities,  the  search  for  mundane
knowledge,  etc.  So  one  has  to  transcend  all  this  before  one  can  come  to  the
stage of pure devotional service.

TEXT  17

Taeza& jaNaq iNaTYaYau¢- Wk->ai¢-ivRiXaZYaTae )

iPa[Yaae ih jaiNaNaae_TYaQaRMah& Sa c MaMa iPa[Ya" )) 17 ))

teñäà jïäné nitya-yukta
eka-bhaktir viçiñyate
priyo hi jïänino ’tyartham
ahaà sa ca mama priyaù

SYNONYMS

teñäm—out of them; jïäné—one in full knowledge; nitya-yuktaù—always
engaged; eka—only; bhaktiù—in devotional service; viçiñyate—is special;
priyaù—very dear; hi—certainly; jïäninaù—to the person in knowledge;
atyartham—highly; aham—I am; saù—he; ca—also; mama—to Me;

priyaù—dear.

TRANSLATION

Of these, the one who is in full knowledge and who is always engaged in
pure devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him, and he is dear to
Me.

PURPORT

Free  from  all  contaminations  of  material  desires,  the  distressed,  the
inquisitive,  the  penniless  and  the  seeker  after  supreme  knowledge  can  all
become  pure  devotees.  But  out  of  them,  he  who  is  in  knowledge  of  the
Absolute  Truth  and  free  from  all  material  desires  becomes  a  really  pure
devotee  of  the  Lord.  And  of  the  four  orders,  the  devotee  who  is  in  full
knowledge and is at the same time engaged in devotional service is, the Lord
says,  the  best.  By  searching  after  knowledge  one  realizes  that  his  self  is
different from his material body, and when further advanced he comes to the
knowledge of impersonal Brahman and Paramätmä. When one is fully purified,
he realizes that his constitutional position is to be the eternal servant of God.
So by association with pure devotees the inquisitive, the distressed, the seeker
after material amelioration and the man in knowledge all become themselves
pure.  But  in  the  preparatory  stage,  the  man  who  is  in  full  knowledge  of  the
Supreme Lord and is at the same time executing devotional service is very dear
to the Lord. He who is situated in pure knowledge of the transcendence of the
Supreme Personality of God is so protected in devotional service that material
contamination cannot touch him.

TEXT  18

odara" SavR WvETae jaNaq TvaTMaEv Mae MaTaMa( )

AaiSQaTa" Sa ih Yau¢-aTMaa MaaMaevaNautaMaa& GaiTaMa( )) 18 ))

udäräù sarva evaite

jïäné tv ätmaiva me matam
ästhitaù sa hi yuktätmä
mäm evänuttamäà gatim

SYNONYMS

udäräù—magnanimous; sarve—all; eva—certainly; ete—these; jïäné—one
who is in knowledge; tu—but; ätmä eva—just like Myself; me—My;
matam—opinion; ästhitaù—situated; saù—he; hi—certainly;
yukta-ätmä—engaged in devotional service; mäm—in Me; eva—certainly;
anuttamäm—the highest; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

All these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is
situated in knowledge of Me I consider to be just like My own self. Being
engaged in My transcendental service, he is sure to attain Me, the highest and
most perfect goal.

PURPORT

It is not that devotees who are less complete in knowledge are not dear to
the Lord. The Lord says that all are magnanimous because anyone who comes
to  the  Lord  for  any  purpose  is  called  a  mahätmä,  or  great  soul.  The  devotees
who  want  some  benefit  out  of  devotional  service  are  accepted  by  the  Lord
because there is an exchange of affection. Out of affection they ask the Lord
for some material benefit, and when they get it they become so satisfied that
they  also  advance  in  devotional  service.  But  the  devotee in full knowledge is
considered to be very dear to the Lord because his only purpose is to serve the
Supreme  Lord  with  love  and  devotion.  Such  a  devotee  cannot  live  a  second
without contacting or serving the Supreme Lord. Similarly, the Supreme Lord
is very fond of His devotee and cannot be separated from him.

In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (9.4.68), the Lord says:

sädhavo hådayaà mahyaà

sädhünäà hådayaà tv aham
mad-anyat te na jänanti
nähaà tebhyo manäg api

“The devotees are always in My heart, and I am always in the hearts of the
devotees. The devotee does not know anything beyond Me, and I also cannot
forget the devotee. There is a very intimate relationship between Me and the
pure devotees. Pure devotees in full knowledge are never out of spiritual touch,
and therefore they are very much dear to Me.”

TEXT  19

bhUNaa& JaNMaNaaMaNTae jaNavaNMaa& Pa[PaÛTae )

vaSaudev" SavRiMaiTa Sa MahaTMaa SaudulR/>a" )) 19 ))

bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä su-durlabhaù

SYNONYMS

bahünäm—many; janmanäm—repeated births and deaths; ante—after;
jïäna-vän—one who is in full knowledge; mäm—unto Me;
prapadyate—surrenders; väsudevaù—the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa;
sarvam—everything; iti—thus; saù—that; mahä-ätmä—great soul;
su-durlabhaù—very rare to see.

TRANSLATION

After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare.

PURPORT

The  living  entity,  while  executing  devotional  service  or  transcendental
rituals  after  many,  many  births,  may  actually  become  situated 
in
transcendental  pure  knowledge  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is
the  ultimate  goal  of  spiritual  realization.  In  the  beginning  of  spiritual
realization,  while  one  is  trying  to  give  up  one’s  attachment  to  materialism,
there  is  some  leaning  towards  impersonalism,  but  when  one  is  further
advanced he can understand that there are activities in the spiritual life and
that  these  activities  constitute  devotional  service.  Realizing  this,  he  becomes
attached  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  surrenders  to  Him.  At
such a time one can understand that Lord Çré Kåñëa’s mercy is everything, that
He  is  the  cause  of  all  causes  and  that  this  material  manifestation  is  not
independent  from  Him.  He  realizes  the  material  world  to  be  a  perverted
reflection of spiritual variegatedness and realizes that in everything there is a
relationship  with  the  Supreme  Lord  Kåñëa.  Thus  he  thinks  of  everything  in
relation  to  Väsudeva,  or  Çré  Kåñëa.  Such  a  universal  vision  of  Väsudeva
precipitates one’s full surrender to the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa as the highest
goal. Such surrendered great souls are very rare.

This verse is very nicely explained in the Third Chapter (verses 14 and 15)

of the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad:

sahasra-çérñä puruñaù
sahasräkñaù sahasra-pät
sa bhümià viçvato våtvä-
tyätiñöhad daçäìgulam

puruña evedaà sarvaà
yad bhütaà yac ca bhavyam
utämåtatvasyeçäno
yad annenätirohati

In  the Chändogya Upaniñad  (5.1.15)  it  is  said,  na  vai  väco  na  cakñüàñi  na
çroträëi  na  manäàséty  äcakñate  präëa  iti  eväcakñate  präëo  hy  evaitäni  sarväëi

bhavanti:  “In  the  body  of  a  living  being  neither  the  power  to  speak,  nor  the
power to see, nor the power to hear, nor the power to think is the prime factor;
it is life which is the center of all activities.” Similarly Lord Väsudeva, or the
Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, is the prime entity in everything. In
this  body  there  are  powers  of  speaking,  of  seeing,  of  hearing,  of  mental
activities, etc. But these are not important if not related to the Supreme Lord.
And  because  Väsudeva  is  all-pervading  and  everything  is  Väsudeva,  the
devotee surrenders in full knowledge (cf. Bhagavad-gétä 7.17 and 11.40).

TEXT  20

k-aMaESTaESTaEôRTajaNaa" Pa[PaÛNTae_NYadevTaa" )

Ta& Ta& iNaYaMaMaaSQaaYa Pa[k*-TYaa iNaYaTaa" SvYaa )) 20 ))

kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù
prapadyante ’nya-devatäù
taà taà niyamam ästhäya
prakåtyä niyatäù svayä

SYNONYMS

kämaiù—by desires; taiù taiù—various; håta—deprived of;
jïänäù—knowledge; prapadyante—surrender; anya—to other;
devatäù—demigods; tam tam—corresponding; niyamam—regulations;
ästhäya—following; prakåtyä—by nature; niyatäù—controlled; svayä—by their
own.

TRANSLATION

Those whose intelligence has been stolen by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to
their own natures.

PURPORT

Those  who  are  freed  from  all  material  contaminations  surrender  unto  the
Supreme  Lord  and  engage  in  His  devotional  service.  As  long  as  the  material
contamination is not completely washed off, they are by nature nondevotees.
But even those who have material desires and who resort to the Supreme Lord
are not so much attracted by external nature; because of approaching the right
goal, they soon become free from all material lust. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it
is  recommended  that  whether  one  is  a  pure  devotee  and  is  free  from  all
material desires, or is full of material desires, or desires liberation from material
contamination, he should in all cases surrender to Väsudeva and worship Him.
As stated in the Bhägavatam (2.3.10):

akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param

Less  intelligent  people  who  have  lost  their  spiritual  sense  take  shelter  of
demigods for immediate fulfillment of material desires. Generally, such people
do  not  go  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  because  they  are  in  the
lower modes of nature (ignorance and passion) and therefore worship various
demigods.  Following  the  rules  and  regulations  of  worship,  they  are  satisfied.
The  worshipers  of  demigods  are  motivated  by  small  desires  and  do  not  know
how  to  reach  the  supreme  goal,  but  a  devotee  of  the  Supreme  Lord  is  not
misguided.  Because  in  Vedic  literature  there  are  recommendations  for
worshiping  different  gods  for  different  purposes  (e.g.,  a  diseased  man  is
recommended  to  worship  the  sun),  those  who  are  not  devotees  of  the  Lord
think  that  for  certain  purposes  demigods  are  better  than  the  Supreme  Lord.
But a pure devotee knows that the Supreme Lord Kåñëa is the master of all. In
the  Caitanya-caritämåta  (Ädi  5.142)  it  is  said,  ekale  éçvara  kåñëa,  ära  saba
bhåtya:  only  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  is  master,  and  all
others  are  servants.  Therefore  a  pure  devotee  never  goes  to  demigods  for
satisfaction of his material needs. He depends on the Supreme Lord. And the
pure devotee is satisfied with whatever He gives.

TEXT  21

Yaae Yaae Yaa& Yaa& TaNau& >a¢-" é[ÖYaaicRTauiMaC^iTa )

TaSYa TaSYaacl/a& é[Öa& TaaMaev ivdDaaMYahMa( )) 21 ))

yo yo yäà yäà tanuà bhaktaù
çraddhayärcitum icchati
tasya tasyäcaläà çraddhäà
täm eva vidadhämy aham

SYNONYMS

yaù yaù—whoever; yäm yäm—whichever; tanum—form of a demigod;
bhaktaù—devotee; çraddhayä—with faith; arcitum—to worship;
icchati—desires; tasya tasya—to him; acaläm—steady; çraddhäm—faith;
täm—that; eva—surely; vidadhämi—give; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

I am in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to worship

some demigod, I make his faith steady so that he can devote himself to that
particular deity.

PURPORT

God  has  given  independence  to  everyone;  therefore,  if  a  person  desires  to
have material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have such facilities from
the  material  demigods,  the  Supreme  Lord,  as  Supersoul  in  everyone’s  heart,
understands  and  gives  facilities  to  such  persons.  As  the  supreme  father  of  all
living  entities,  He  does  not  interfere  with  their  independence,  but  gives  all
facilities so that they can fulfill their material desires. Some may ask why the
all-powerful God gives facilities to the living entities for enjoying this material
world and so lets them fall into the trap of the illusory energy. The answer is
that if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give such facilities, then there

independence.  Therefore  He  gives  everyone  full
is  no  meaning  to 
independence—whatever  one  likes—but  His  ultimate  instruction  we  find  in
the  Bhagavad-gétä:  one  should  give  up  all  other  engagements  and  fully
surrender unto Him. That will make man happy.

Both the living entity and the demigods are subordinate to the will of the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead;  therefore  the  living  entity  cannot  worship
the  demigod  by  his  own  desire,  nor  can  the  demigod  bestow  any  benediction
without the supreme will. As it is said, not a blade of grass moves without the
will  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Generally,  persons  who  are
distressed in the material world go to the demigods, as they are advised in the
Vedic  literature.  A  person  wanting  some  particular  thing  may  worship  such
and  such  a  demigod.  For  example,  a  diseased  person  is  recommended  to
worship the sun-god; a person wanting education may worship the goddess of
learning,  Sarasvaté;  and  a  person  wanting  a  beautiful  wife  may  worship  the
goddess Umä, the wife of Lord Çiva. In this way there are recommendations in
the  çästras  (Vedic  scriptures)  for  different  modes  of  worship  of  different
demigods.  And  because  a  particular  living  entity  wants  to  enjoy  a  particular
material  facility,  the  Lord  inspires  him  with  a  strong  desire  to  achieve  that
benediction from that particular demigod, and so he successfully receives the
benediction.  The  particular  mode  of  the  devotional  attitude  of  the  living
entity  toward  a  particular  type  of  demigod  is  also  arranged  by  the  Supreme
Lord. The demigods cannot infuse the living entities with such an affinity, but
because He is the Supreme Lord, or the Supersoul who is present in the hearts
of all living entities, Kåñëa gives impetus to man to worship certain demigods.
The demigods are actually different parts of the universal body of the Supreme
Lord; therefore they have no independence. In the Vedic literature it is stated:
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead as Supersoul is also present within the
heart of the demigod; therefore He arranges through the demigod to fulfill the
desire  of  the  living  entity.  But  both  the  demigod  and  the  living  entity  are
dependent on the supreme will. They are not independent.”

TEXT  22

Sa TaYaa é[ÖYaa Yau¢-STaSYaaraDaNaMaqhTae )

l/>aTae c TaTa" k-aMaaNMaYaEv ivihTaaiNhTaaNa( )) 22 ))

sa tayä çraddhayä yuktas
tasyärädhanam éhate
labhate ca tataù kämän
mayaiva vihitän hi tän

SYNONYMS

saù—he; tayä—with that; çraddhayä—inspiration; yuktaù—endowed;
tasya—of that demigod; ärädhanam—for the worship; éhate—he aspires;
labhate—obtains; ca—and; tataù—from that; kämän—his desires; mayä—by
Me; eva—alone; vihitän—arranged; hi—certainly; tän—those.

TRANSLATION

Endowed with such a faith, he endeavors to worship a particular demigod

and obtains his desires. But in actuality these benefits are bestowed by Me
alone.

PURPORT

The  demigods  cannot  award  benedictions  to  their  devotees  without  the
permission of the Supreme Lord. The living entity may forget that everything
is  the  property  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  but  the  demigods  do  not  forget.  So  the
worship  of  demigods  and  achievement  of  desired  results  are  due  not  to  the
demigods  but  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  by  arrangement.  The
less intelligent living entity does not know this, and therefore he foolishly goes
to  the  demigods  for  some  benefit.  But  the  pure  devotee,  when  in  need  of
something,  prays  only  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  Asking  for  material  benefit,
however, is not a sign of a pure devotee. A living entity goes to the demigods
usually  because  he  is  mad  to  fulfill  his  lust.  This  happens  when  something
undue is desired by the living entity and the Lord Himself does not fulfill the

desire. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that one who worships the Supreme
Lord  and  at  the  same  time  desires  material  enjoyment  is  contradictory in his
desires. Devotional service to the Supreme Lord and the worship of a demigod
cannot be on the same platform, because worship of a demigod is material and
devotional service to the Supreme Lord is completely spiritual.

For the living entity who desires to return to Godhead, material desires are
impediments. A pure devotee of the Lord is therefore not awarded the material
benefits  desired  by  less  intelligent  living  entities,  who  therefore  prefer  to
worship demigods of the material world rather than engage in the devotional
service of the Supreme Lord.

TEXT  23

ANTavtau f-l&/ Taeza& TaÙvTYaLPaMaeDaSaaMa( )

devaNdevYaJaae YaaiNTa MaÙ¢-a YaaiNTa MaaMaiPa )) 23 ))

antavat tu phalaà teñäà
tad bhavaty alpa-medhasäm
devän deva-yajo yänti
mad-bhaktä yänti mäm api

SYNONYMS

anta-vat—perishable; tu—but; phalam—fruit; teñäm—their; tat—that;
bhavati—becomes; alpa-medhasäm—of those of small intelligence; devän—to
the demigods; deva-yajaù—the worshipers of the demigods; yänti—go;
mat—My; bhaktäù—devotees; yänti—go; mäm—to Me; api—also.

TRANSLATION

Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited

and temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to the planets of the
demigods, but My devotees ultimately reach My supreme planet.

PURPORT

Some  commentators  on  the  Bhagavad-gétä  say  that  one  who  worships  a
demigod  can  reach  the  Supreme  Lord,  but  here  it  is  clearly  stated  that  the
worshipers  of  demigods  go  to  the  different  planetary  systems  where  various
demigods  are  situated,  just  as  a  worshiper  of  the  sun  achieves  the  sun  or  a
worshiper of the demigod of the moon achieves the moon. Similarly, if anyone
wants  to  worship  a  demigod  like  Indra,  he  can  attain  that  particular  god’s
planet.  It  is  not  that  everyone,  regardless  of  whatever  demigod  is  worshiped,
will reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is denied here, for it is
clearly  stated  that  the  worshipers  of  demigods  go  to  different  planets  in  the
material  world  but  the  devotee  of  the  Supreme  Lord  goes  directly  to  the
supreme planet of the Personality of Godhead.

Here the point may be raised that if the demigods are different parts of the
body  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  then  the  same  end  should  be  achieved  by
worshiping  them.  However,  worshipers  of  the  demigods  are  less  intelligent
because they don’t know to what part of the body food must be supplied. Some
of them are so foolish that they claim that there are many parts and many ways
to supply food. This isn’t very sanguine. Can anyone supply food to the body
through the ears or eyes? They do not know that these demigods are different
parts of the universal body of the Supreme Lord, and in their ignorance they
believe that each and every demigod is a separate God and a competitor of the
Supreme Lord.

Not  only  are  demigods  parts  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  but  ordinary  living
entities are also. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is stated that the brähmaëas are
the head of the Supreme Lord, the kñatriyas are His arms, the vaiçyas are His
waist,  the  çüdras  are  His  legs,  and  all  serve  different  functions.  Regardless  of
the  situation,  if  one  knows  that  both  the  demigods  and  himself  are  part  and
parcel  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  his  knowledge  is  perfect.  But  if  he  does  not
understand this, he achieves different planets where the demigods reside. This
is not the same destination the devotee reaches.

The results achieved by the demigods’ benedictions are perishable because
within this material world the planets, the demigods and their worshipers are

all  perishable.  Therefore  it  is  clearly  stated  in  this  verse  that  all  results
achieved by worshiping demigods are perishable, and therefore such worship is
performed  by  the  less  intelligent  living  entity.  Because  the  pure  devotee
engaged  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  in  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord
achieves eternal blissful existence that is full of knowledge, his achievements
and  those  of  the  common  worshiper  of  the  demigods  are  different.  The
Supreme  Lord  is  unlimited;  His  favor  is  unlimited;  His  mercy  is  unlimited.
Therefore the mercy of the Supreme Lord upon His pure devotees is unlimited.

TEXT  24

AVYa¢&- VYai¢-MaaPaà& MaNYaNTae MaaMabuÖYa" )

Par& >aavMaJaaNaNTaae MaMaaVYaYaMaNautaMaMa( )) 24 ))

avyaktaà vyaktim äpannaà
manyante mäm abuddhayaù
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mamävyayam anuttamam

SYNONYMS

avyaktam—nonmanifested; vyaktim—personality; äpannam—achieved;
manyante—think; mäm—Me; abuddhayaù—less intelligent persons;
param—supreme; bhävam—existence; ajänantaù—without knowing;
mama—My; avyayam—imperishable; anuttamam—the finest.

TRANSLATION

Unintelligent men, who do not know Me perfectly, think that I, the

Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, was impersonal before and have now
assumed this personality. Due to their small knowledge, they do not know My
higher nature, which is imperishable and supreme.

PURPORT

Those  who  are  worshipers  of  demigods  have  been  described  as  less
intelligent  persons,  and  here  the  impersonalists  are  similarly  described.  Lord
Kåñëa  in  His  personal  form  is  here  speaking  before  Arjuna,  and  still,  due  to
ignorance, impersonalists argue that the Supreme Lord ultimately has no form.
Yämunäcärya,  a  great  devotee  of  the  Lord  in  the  disciplic  succession  of
Rämänujäcärya,  has  written  two  very  appropriate  verses  in  this  connection.
He says,

tväà çéla-rüpa-caritaiù parama-prakåñöaiù
sattvena sättvikatayä prabalaiç ca çästraiù
prakhyäta-daiva-paramärtha-vidäà mataiç ca
naiväsura-prakåtayaù prabhavanti boddhum

“My  dear  Lord,  devotees  like  Vyäsadeva  and  Närada  know  You  to  be  the
Personality of Godhead. By understanding different Vedic literatures, one can
come to know Your characteristics, Your form and Your activities, and one can
thus understand that You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But those
who are in the modes of passion and ignorance, the demons, the nondevotees,
cannot understand You. They are unable to understand You. However expert
such nondevotees may be in discussing Vedänta and the Upaniñads and other
Vedic  literatures,  it  is  not  possible  for  them  to  understand  the  Personality  of
Godhead.” (Stotra-ratna 12)

In the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that the Personality of Godhead cannot
be understood simply by study of the Vedänta literature. Only by the mercy of
the Supreme Lord can the Personality of the Supreme be known. Therefore in
this verse it is clearly stated that not only are the worshipers of the demigods
less  intelligent,  but  those  nondevotees  who  are  engaged  in  Vedänta  and
speculation on Vedic literature without any tinge of true Kåñëa consciousness
are  also  less  intelligent,  and  for  them  it  is  not  possible  to  understand  God’s
personal  nature.  Persons  who  are  under  the  impression  that  the  Absolute
Truth  is  impersonal  are  described  as  abuddhayaù,  which  means  those  who  do
not  know 
the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  it  is  stated  that  supreme  realization  begins  from  the
impersonal  Brahman  and  then  rises  to  the  localized  Supersoul—but  the

the  Absolute  Truth. 

the  ultimate 

feature  of 

In 

ultimate  word  in  the  Absolute  Truth  is  the  Personality  of  Godhead.  Modern
impersonalists are still less intelligent, for they do not even follow their great
predecessor  Çaìkaräcärya,  who  has  specifically  stated  that  Kåñëa  is  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Impersonalists,  therefore,  not  knowing  the
Supreme Truth, think Kåñëa to be only the son of Devaké and Vasudeva, or a
prince,  or  a  powerful  living  entity.  This  is  also  condemned  in  the
Bhagavad-gétä  (9.11).  Avajänanti  mäà  müòhä  mänuñéà  tanum  äçritam:  “Only
the fools regard Me as an ordinary person.”

The fact is that no one can understand Kåñëa without rendering devotional
service  and  without  developing  Kåñëa  consciousness.  The  Bhägavatam
(10.14.29) confirms this:

athäpi te deva padämbuja-dvaya-
prasäda-leçänugåhéta eva hi
jänäti tattvaà bhagavan-mahimno
na cänya eko ’pi ciraà vicinvan

“My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus
feet,  he  can  understand  the  greatness  of  Your  personality.  But  those  who
speculate  to  understand  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  are  unable  to
know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many years.” One
cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, or His form,
quality or name simply by mental speculation or by discussing Vedic literature.
One must understand Him by devotional service. When one is fully engaged in
Kåñëa  consciousness,  beginning  by  chanting  the  mahä-mantra—Hare  Kåñëa,
Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,
Hare  Hare—then  only  can  one  understand  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead. Nondevotee impersonalists think that Kåñëa has a body made of this
material nature and that all His activities, His form and everything are mäyä.
These impersonalists are known as Mäyävädés. They do not know the ultimate
truth.

The twentieth verse clearly states, kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù prapadyante
’nya-devatäù.  “Those  who  are  blinded  by  lusty  desires  surrender  unto  the
different  demigods.”  It  is  accepted  that  besides  the  Supreme  Personality  of

Godhead,  there  are  demigods  who  have  their  different  planets,  and  the  Lord
also  has  a  planet.  As  stated  in  the  twenty-third  verse,  devän  deva-yajo  yänti
mad-bhaktä yänti mäm api: the worshipers of the demigods go to the different
planets of the demigods, and those who are devotees of Lord Kåñëa go to the
Kåñëaloka  planet.  Although  this  is  clearly  stated,  the  foolish  impersonalists
still  maintain  that  the  Lord  is  formless  and  that  these  forms  are  impositions.
From the study of the Gétä does it appear that the demigods and their abodes
are  impersonal?  Clearly,  neither  the  demigods  nor  Kåñëa,  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  are  impersonal.  They  are  all  persons;  Lord  Kåñëa  is
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  He  has  His  own  planet,  and  the
demigods have theirs.

Therefore the monistic contention that ultimate truth is formless and that
form  is  imposed  does  not  hold  true.  It  is  clearly  stated  here  that  it  is  not
imposed. From the Bhagavad-gétä we can clearly understand that the forms of
the  demigods  and  the  form  of  the  Supreme  Lord  are  simultaneously  existing
and that Lord Kåñëa is sac-cid-änanda, eternal blissful knowledge. The Vedas
also confirm that the Supreme Absolute Truth is änanda-mayo ’bhyäsät, or by
nature  full  of  blissful  pleasure,  and  that  He  is  the  reservoir  of  unlimited
auspicious  qualities.  And  in  the  Gétä  the  Lord  says  that  although  He  is  aja
(unborn), He still appears. These are the facts that we should understand from
the  Bhagavad-gétä.  We  cannot  understand  how  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead can be impersonal; the imposition theory of the impersonalist monist
is false as far as the statements of the Gétä are concerned. It is clear herein that
the Supreme Absolute Truth, Lord Kåñëa, has both form and personality.

TEXT  25

Naah& Pa[k-aXa" SavRSYa YaaeGaMaaYaaSaMaav*Ta" )

MaU!ae_Ya& Naai>aJaaNaaiTa l/aek-ae MaaMaJaMaVYaYaMa( )) 25 ))

nähaà prakäçaù sarvasya
yoga-mäyä-samävåtaù
müòho ’yaà näbhijänäti

loko mäm ajam avyayam

SYNONYMS

na—nor; aham—I; prakäçaù—manifest; sarvasya—to everyone;
yoga-mäyä—by internal potency; samävåtaù—covered; müòhaù—foolish;
ayam—these; na—not; abhijänäti—can understand; lokaù—persons;
mäm—Me; ajam—unborn; avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered
by My internal potency, and therefore they do not know that I am unborn and
infallible.

PURPORT

It may be argued that since Kåñëa was present on this earth and was visible
to everyone, then why isn’t He manifest to everyone now? But actually He was
not  manifest  to  everyone.  When  Kåñëa  was  present  there  were  only  a  few
people who could understand Him to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In  the  assembly  of  Kurus,  when  Çiçupäla  spoke  against  Kåñëa’s  being  elected
president  of  the  assembly,  Bhéñma  supported  Him  and  proclaimed  Him  to  be
the Supreme God. Similarly, the Päëòavas and a few others knew that He was
the Supreme, but not everyone. He was not revealed to the nondevotees and
the common man. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa says that but for His
pure  devotees,  all  men  consider  Him  to  be  like  themselves.  He  was  manifest
only  to  His  devotees  as  the  reservoir  of  all  pleasure.  But  to  others,  to
unintelligent nondevotees, He was covered by His internal potency.

In the prayers of Kunté in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.8.19) it is said that the
Lord is covered by the curtain of yoga-mäyä and thus ordinary people cannot
understand  Him.  This  yoga-mäyä  curtain  is  also  confirmed  in  the Éçopaniñad
(mantra 15), in which the devotee prays:

hiraëmayena pätreëa

satyasyäpihitaà mukham
tat tvaà püñann apävåëu
satya-dharmäya dåñöaye

“O my Lord, You are the maintainer of the entire universe, and devotional
service to You is the highest religious principle. Therefore, I pray that You will
also maintain me. Your transcendental form is covered by the yoga-mäyä. The
brahmajyoti  is  the  covering  of  the  internal  potency.  May  You  kindly  remove
this  glowing  effulgence  that  impedes  my  seeing  Your  sac-cid-änanda-vigraha
[Bs. 5.1], Your eternal form of bliss and knowledge.” The Supreme Personality
of  Godhead  in  His  transcendental  form  of  bliss  and  knowledge  is  covered  by
the internal potency of the brahmajyoti, and the less intelligent impersonalists
cannot see the Supreme on this account.

Also in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.7) there is this prayer by Brahmä: “O
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  O  Supersoul,  O  master  of  all  mystery,  who
can  calculate  Your  potency  and  pastimes  in  this  world?  You  are  always
expanding Your internal potency, and therefore no one can understand You.
Learned  scientists  and  learned  scholars  can  examine  the  atomic  constitution
of the material world or even the planets, but still they are unable to calculate
Your  energy  and  potency,  although  You  are  present  before  them.”  The
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Lord  Kåñëa,  is  not  only  unborn  but  also
avyaya,  inexhaustible.  His  eternal  form  is  bliss  and  knowledge,  and  His
energies are all inexhaustible.

TEXT  26

vedah& SaMaTaqTaaiNa vTaRMaaNaaiNa caJauRNa )

>aivZYaai<a c >aUTaaiNa Maa& Tau ved Na k-êNa )) 26 ))

vedähaà samatétäni
vartamänäni cärjuna
bhaviñyäëi ca bhütäni
mäà tu veda na kaçcana

SYNONYMS

veda—know; aham—I; samatétäni—completely past; vartamänäni—present;
ca—and; arjuna—O Arjuna; bhaviñyäëi—future; ca—also; bhütäni—all living
entities; mäm—Me; tu—but; veda—knows; na—not; kaçcana—anyone.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that
has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and all things that
are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me no one knows.

PURPORT

Here  the  question  of  personality  and  impersonality  is  clearly  stated.  If
Kåñëa, the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, were mäyä, material,
as the impersonalists consider Him to be, then like the living entity He would
change  His  body  and  forget  everything  about  His  past  life.  Anyone  with  a
material body cannot remember his past life, nor can he foretell his future life,
nor can he predict the outcome of his present life; therefore he cannot know
what  is  happening  in  past,  present  and  future.  Unless  one  is  liberated  from
material contamination, he cannot know past, present and future.

Unlike  the  ordinary  human  being,  Lord  Kåñëa  clearly  says  that  He
completely  knows  what  happened  in  the  past,  what  is  happening  in  the
present,  and  what  will  happen  in  the  future.  In  the  Fourth  Chapter  we  have
seen that Lord Kåñëa remembers instructing Vivasvän, the sun-god, millions of
years  ago.  Kåñëa  knows  every  living  entity  because  He  is  situated  in  every
living being’s heart as the Supersoul. But despite His presence in every living
entity as Supersoul and His presence as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the  less  intelligent,  even  if  able  to  realize  the  impersonal  Brahman,  cannot
realize Çré Kåñëa as the Supreme Person. Certainly the transcendental body of
Çré Kåñëa is not perishable. He is just like the sun, and mäyä is like a cloud. In
the material world we can see that there is the sun and that there are clouds

and  different  stars  and  planets.  The  clouds  may  cover  all  these  in  the  sky
temporarily, but this covering is only apparent to our limited vision. The sun,
moon  and  stars  are  not  actually  covered.  Similarly,  mäyä  cannot  cover  the
Supreme  Lord.  By  His  internal  potency  He  is  not  manifest  to  the  less
intelligent class of men. As it is stated in the third verse of this chapter, out of
millions and millions of men, some try to become perfect in this human form
of life, and out of thousands and thousands of such perfected men, hardly one
can understand what Lord Kåñëa is. Even if one is perfected by realization of
impersonal  Brahman  or  localized  Paramätmä,  he  cannot  possibly  understand
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa,  without  being  in  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  27

wC^aÜezSaMauTQaeNa ÜNÜMaaeheNa >aarTa )

SavR>aUTaaiNa SaMMaaeh& SaGaeR YaaiNTa ParNTaPa )) 27 ))

icchä-dveña-samutthena
dvandva-mohena bhärata
sarva-bhütäni sammohaà
sarge yänti parantapa

SYNONYMS

icchä—desire; dveña—and hate; samutthena—arisen from; dvandva—of
duality; mohena—by the illusion; bhärata—O scion of Bharata; sarva—all;
bhütäni—living entities; sammoham—into delusion; sarge—while taking birth;
yänti—go; parantapa—O conqueror of enemies.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, O conqueror of the foe, all living entities are born into

delusion, bewildered by dualities arisen from desire and hate.

PURPORT

The real constitutional position of the living entity is that of subordination
to  the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is  pure  knowledge.  When  one  is  deluded  into
separation from this pure knowledge, he becomes controlled by illusory energy
and  cannot  understand  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  The  illusory
energy is manifested in the duality of desire and hate. Due to desire and hate,
the ignorant person wants to become one with the Supreme Lord and envies
Kåñëa  as  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Pure  devotees,  who  are  not
deluded  or  contaminated  by  desire  and  hate,  can  understand  that  Lord  Çré
Kåñëa appears by His internal potencies, but those who are deluded by duality
and  nescience  think  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  created  by
their  misfortune.  Such  deluded  persons,
material  energies.  This 
symptomatically,  dwell  in  dualities  of  dishonor  and  honor,  misery  and
happiness,  woman  and  man,  good  and  bad,  pleasure  and  pain,  etc.,  thinking,
“This  is  my  wife;  this  is  my  house;  I  am  the  master  of  this  house;  I  am  the
husband  of  this  wife.”  These  are  the  dualities  of  delusion.  Those  who  are  so
deluded  by  dualities  are  completely  foolish  and  therefore  cannot  understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

is 

TEXT  28

Yaeza& TvNTaGaTa& PaaPa& JaNaaNaa& Pau<Yak-MaR<aaMa( )

Tae ÜNÜMaaehiNaMauR¢-a >aJaNTae Maa& d*!v]Taa" )) 28 ))

yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù

SYNONYMS

yeñäm—whose; tu—but; anta-gatam—completely eradicated; päpam—sin;

janänäm—of the persons; puëya—pious; karmaëäm—whose previous
activities; te—they; dvandva—of duality; moha—delusion; nirmuktäù—free
from; bhajante—engage in devotional service; mäm—to Me;
dåòha-vratäù—with determination.

TRANSLATION

Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life and whose
sinful actions are completely eradicated are freed from the dualities of delusion,
and they engage themselves in My service with determination.

PURPORT

Those eligible for elevation to the transcendental position are mentioned in
this  verse.  For  those  who  are  sinful,  atheistic,  foolish  and  deceitful,  it  is  very
difficult  to  transcend  the  duality  of  desire  and  hate.  Only  those  who  have
passed their lives in practicing the regulative principles of religion, who have
acted piously and who have conquered sinful reactions can accept devotional
service and gradually rise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.  Then,  gradually,  they  can  meditate  in  trance  on  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is the process of being situated on the spiritual
platform. This elevation is possible in Kåñëa consciousness in the association of
pure  devotees,  for  in  the  association  of  great  devotees  one  can  be  delivered
from delusion.

It is stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.5.2) that if one actually wants to be
liberated  he  must  render  service  to  the  devotees  (mahat-seväà  dväram  ähur
vimukteù);  but  one  who  associates  with  materialistic  people  is  on  the  path
leading to the darkest region of existence (tamo-dväraà yoñitäà saìgi-saìgam).
All the devotees of the Lord traverse this earth just to recover the conditioned
souls from their delusion. The impersonalists do not know that forgetting their
constitutional  position  as  subordinate  to  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  greatest
violation  of  God’s  law.  Unless  one  is  reinstated  in  his  own  constitutional
position, it is not possible to understand the Supreme Personality or to be fully
engaged in His transcendental loving service with determination.

TEXT  29

JaraMar<aMaae+aaYa MaaMaaié[TYa YaTaiNTa Yae )

Tae b]ø TaiÜdu" k*-TòMaDYaaTMa& k-MaR cai%l/Ma( )) 29 ))

jarä-maraëa-mokñäya
mäm äçritya yatanti ye
te brahma tad viduù kåtsnam
adhyätmaà karma cäkhilam

SYNONYMS

jarä—from old age; maraëa—and death; mokñäya—for the purpose of
liberation; mäm—Me; äçritya—taking shelter of; yatanti—endeavor; ye—all
those who; te—such persons; brahma—Brahman; tat—actually that;
viduù—they know; kåtsnam—everything; adhyätmam—transcendental;
karma—activities; ca—also; akhilam—entirely.

TRANSLATION

Intelligent persons who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and death

take refuge in Me in devotional service. They are actually Brahman because
they entirely know everything about transcendental activities.

PURPORT

Birth,  death,  old  age  and  diseases  affect  this  material  body,  but  not  the
spiritual  body.  There  is  no  birth,  death,  old  age  and  disease  for  the  spiritual
body, so one who attains a spiritual body, becomes one of the associates of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and engages in eternal devotional service is
really  liberated.  Ahaà  brahmäsmi:  I  am  spirit.  It  is  said  that  one  should
understand that he is Brahman, spirit soul. This Brahman conception of life is
also  in  devotional  service,  as  described  in  this  verse.  The  pure  devotees  are

transcendentally situated on the Brahman platform, and they know everything
about transcendental activities.

in 

themselves 

Four  kinds  of 

the
impure  devotees  who  engage 
transcendental  service  of  the  Lord  achieve  their  respective  goals,  and  by  the
grace of the Supreme Lord, when they are fully Kåñëa conscious, they actually
enjoy  spiritual  association  with  the  Supreme  Lord.  But  those  who  are
worshipers of demigods never reach the Supreme Lord in His supreme planet.
Even the less intelligent Brahman-realized persons cannot reach the supreme
planet  of  Kåñëa  known  as  Goloka  Våndävana.  Only  persons  who  perform
activities  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  (mäm  äçritya)  are  actually  entitled  to  be
called  Brahman,  because  they  are  actually  endeavoring  to  reach  the  Kåñëa
planet.  Such  persons  have  no  misgivings  about  Kåñëa,  and  thus  they  are
factually Brahman.

Those who are engaged in worshiping the form or arcä of the Lord, or who
are  engaged  in  meditation  on  the  Lord  simply  for  liberation  from  material
bondage,  also  know,  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  the  purports  of  Brahman,
adhibhüta, etc., as explained by the Lord in the next chapter.

TEXT  30

SaaiDa>aUTaaiDadEv& Maa& SaaiDaYaj& c Yae ivdu" )

Pa[Yaa<ak-ale/_iPa c Maa& Tae ivduYauR¢-ceTaSa" )) 30 ))

sädhibhütädhidaivaà mäà
sädhiyajïaà ca ye viduù
prayäëa-käle ’pi ca mäà
te vidur yukta-cetasaù

SYNONYMS

sa-adhibhüta—and the governing principle of the material manifestation;
adhidaivam—governing all the demigods; mäm—Me; sa-adhiyajïam—and
governing all sacrifices; ca—also; ye—those who; viduù—know; prayäëa—of

death; käle—at the time; api—even; ca—and; mäm—Me; te—they;
viduù—know; yukta-cetasaù—their minds engaged in Me.

TRANSLATION

Those in full consciousness of Me, who know Me, the Supreme Lord, to be
the governing principle of the material manifestation, of the demigods, and of all
methods of sacrifice, can understand and know Me, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, even at the time of death.

PURPORT

Persons acting in Kåñëa consciousness are never deviated from the path of
entirely  understanding  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  In  the
transcendental  association  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  can  understand  how
the Supreme Lord is the governing principle of the material manifestation and
even  of  the  demigods.  Gradually,  by  such  transcendental  association,  one
becomes convinced of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and at the time of
death  such  a  Kåñëa  conscious  person  can  never  forget  Kåñëa.  Naturally  he  is
thus promoted to the planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Våndävana.

This  Seventh  Chapter  particularly  explains  how  one  can  become  a  fully
Kåñëa  conscious  person.  The  beginning  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  association
of persons who are Kåñëa conscious. Such association is spiritual and puts one
directly  in  touch  with  the  Supreme  Lord,  and,  by  His  grace,  one  can
understand  Kåñëa  to  be  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  At  the  same
time one can really understand the constitutional position of the living entity
and  how  the  living  entity  forgets  Kåñëa  and  becomes  entangled  in  material
activities. By gradual development of Kåñëa consciousness in good association,
the  living  entity  can  understand  that  due  to  forgetfulness  of  Kåñëa  he  has
become  conditioned  by  the  laws  of  material  nature.  He  can  also  understand
that  this  human  form  of  life  is  an  opportunity  to  regain  Kåñëa  consciousness
and that it should be fully utilized to attain the causeless mercy of the Supreme
Lord.

Many subjects have been discussed in this chapter: the man in distress, the

inquisitive  man,  the  man  in  want  of  material  necessities,  knowledge  of
Brahman, knowledge of Paramätmä, liberation from birth, death and diseases,
and  worship  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  However,  he  who  is  actually  elevated  in
Kåñëa  consciousness  does  not  care  for  the  different  processes.  He  simply
directly  engages  himself  in  activities  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  thereby
factually  attains  his  constitutional  position  as  an  eternal  servitor  of  Lord
Kåñëa.  In  such  a  situation  he  takes  pleasure  in  hearing  and  glorifying  the
Supreme Lord in pure devotional service. He is convinced that by his doing so,
all his objectives will be fulfilled. This determined faith is called dåòha-vrata,
and it is the beginning of bhakti-yoga, or transcendental loving service. That is
the verdict of all scriptures. This Seventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä is the
substance of that conviction.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventh Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Knowledge of the Absolute.

- CHAPTER 8 -
Attaining the Supreme

TEXT  1

AJauRNa ovac

ik&- Tad(b]ø ik-MaDYaaTMa& ik&- k-MaR PauåzaetaMa )

AiDa>aUTa& c ik&- Pa[ae¢-MaiDadEv& ik-MauCYaTae )) 1 ))

arjuna uväca
kià tad brahma kim adhyätmaà

kià karma puruñottama
adhibhütaà ca kià proktam
adhidaivaà kim ucyate

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; kim—what; tat—that; brahma—Brahman;
kim—what; adhyätmam—the self; kim—what; karma—fruitive activities;
puruña-uttama—O Supreme Person; adhibhütam—the material manifestation;
ca—and; kim—what; proktam—is called; adhidaivam—the demigods;
kim—what; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is
the self? What are fruitive activities? What is this material manifestation? And
what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.

PURPORT

In  this  chapter  Lord  Kåñëa  answers  different  questions  from  Arjuna,
beginning  with  “What  is  Brahman?”  The  Lord  also  explains  karma  (fruitive
activities), devotional service and yoga principles, and devotional service in its
pure form. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam explains that the Supreme Absolute Truth
is known as Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän. In addition, the living entity,
the  individual  soul,  is  also  called  Brahman.  Arjuna  also  inquires  about  ätmä,
which refers to body, soul and mind. According to the Vedic dictionary, ätmä
refers to the mind, soul, body and senses also.

Arjuna  has  addressed  the  Supreme  Lord  as  Puruñottama,  Supreme  Person,
which means that he was putting these questions not simply to a friend but to
the  Supreme  Person,  knowing  Him  to  be  the  supreme  authority  able  to  give
definitive answers.

TEXT  2

AiDaYaj" k-Qa& k-ae_}a dehe_iSMaNMaDauSaUdNa )

Pa[Yaa<ak-ale/ c k-Qa& jeYaae_iSa iNaYaTaaTMai>a" )) 2 ))

adhiyajïaù kathaà ko ’tra
dehe ’smin madhusüdana
prayäëa-käle ca kathaà
jïeyo ’si niyatätmabhiù

SYNONYMS

adhiyajïaù—the Lord of sacrifice; katham—how; kaù—who; atra—here;
dehe—in the body; asmin—this; madhusüdana—O Madhusüdana;
prayäëa-käle—at the time of death; ca—and; katham—how; jïeyaù asi—You
can be known; niyata-ätmabhiù—by the self-controlled.

TRANSLATION

Who is the Lord of sacrifice, and how does He live in the body, O

Madhusüdana? And how can those engaged in devotional service know You at
the time of death?

PURPORT

“Lord of sacrifice” may refer to either Indra or Viñëu. Viñëu is the chief of
the primal demigods, including Brahmä and Çiva, and Indra is the chief of the
administrative  demigods.  Both  Indra  and  Viñëu  are  worshiped  by  yajïa
performances.  But  here  Arjuna  asks  who  is  actually  the  Lord  of  yajïa
(sacrifice) and how the Lord is residing within the body of the living entity.

Arjuna  addresses  the  Lord  as  Madhusüdana  because  Kåñëa  once  killed  a
demon  named  Madhu.  Actually  these  questions,  which  are  of  the  nature  of
doubts,  should  not  have  arisen  in  the  mind  of  Arjuna,  because  Arjuna  is  a
Kåñëa conscious devotee. Therefore these doubts are like demons. Since Kåñëa
is so expert in killing demons, Arjuna here addresses Him as Madhusüdana so

that Kåñëa might kill the demonic doubts that arise in Arjuna’s mind.

Now  the  word  prayäëa-käle  in  this  verse  is  very  significant  because
whatever  we  do  in  life  will  be  tested  at  the  time  of  death.  Arjuna  is  very
anxious to know of those who are constantly engaged in Kåñëa consciousness.
What should be their position at that final moment? At the time of death all
the bodily functions are disrupted, and the mind is not in a proper condition.
Thus disturbed by the bodily situation, one may not be able to remember the
Supreme  Lord.  Mahäräja  Kulaçekhara,  a  great  devotee,  prays,  “My  dear  Lord,
just now I am quite healthy, and it is better that I die immediately so that the
swan  of  my  mind  can  seek  entrance  at  the  stem  of  Your  lotus  feet.”  The
metaphor  is  used  because  the  swan,  a  bird  of  the  water,  takes  pleasure  in
digging into the lotus flowers; its sporting proclivity is to enter the lotus flower.
Mahäräja  Kulaçekhara  says  to  the  Lord,  “Now  my  mind  is  undisturbed,  and  I
am quite healthy. If I die immediately, thinking of Your lotus feet, then I am
sure that my performance of Your devotional service will become perfect. But
if I have to wait for my natural death, then I do not know what will happen,
because at that time the bodily functions will be disrupted, my throat will be
choked  up,  and  I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  be  able  to  chant  Your  name.
Better  let  me  die  immediately.”  Arjuna  questions  how  a  person  can  fix  his
mind on Kåñëa’s lotus feet at such a time.

TEXT  3

é[q>aGavaNauvac

A+ar& b]ø ParMa& Sv>aavae_DYaaTMaMauCYaTae )

>aUTa>aavaeÙvk-rae ivSaGaR" k-MaRSa&ijTa" )) 3 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
akñaraà brahma paramaà
svabhävo ’dhyätmam ucyate
bhüta-bhävodbhava-karo
visargaù karma-saàjïitaù

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
akñaram—indestructible; brahma—Brahman; paramam—transcendental;
svabhävaù—eternal nature; adhyätmam—the self; ucyate—is called;
bhüta-bhäva-udbhava-karaù—producing the material bodies of the living
entities; visargaù—creation; karma—fruitive activities; saàjïitaù—is called.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The indestructible,

transcendental living entity is called Brahman, and his eternal nature is called
adhyätma, the self. Action pertaining to the development of the material bodies
of the living entities is called karma, or fruitive activities.

PURPORT

Brahman is indestructible and eternally existing, and its constitution is not
changed  at  any  time.  But  beyond  Brahman  there  is  Parabrahman.  Brahman
refers to the living entity, and Parabrahman refers to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The constitutional position of the living entity is different from
the  position  he  takes  in  the  material  world.  In  material  consciousness  his
nature is to try to be the lord of matter, but in spiritual consciousness, Kåñëa
consciousness, his position is to serve the Supreme. When the living entity is
in  material  consciousness,  he  has  to  take  on  various  bodies  in  the  material
world.  That  is  called  karma,  or  varied  creation  by  the  force  of  material
consciousness.

In Vedic literature the living entity is called jévätmä and Brahman, but he is
never  called  Parabrahman.  The  living  entity  (jévätmä)  takes  different
positions—sometimes  he  merges  into  the  dark  material  nature  and  identifies
himself  with  matter,  and  sometimes  he  identifies  himself  with  the  superior,
spiritual  nature.  Therefore  he  is  called  the  Supreme  Lord’s  marginal  energy.
According to his identification with material or spiritual nature, he receives a

material or spiritual body. In material nature he may take a body from any of
the  8,400,000  species  of  life,  but  in  spiritual  nature  he  has  only  one  body.  In
material nature he is manifested sometimes as a man, demigod, animal, beast,
bird,  etc.,  according  to  his  karma.  To  attain  material  heavenly  planets  and
enjoy  their  facilities,  he  sometimes  performs  sacrifices  (yajïa),  but  when  his
merit is exhausted he returns to earth again in the form of a man. This process
is called karma.

The  Chändogya  Upaniñad  describes  the  Vedic  sacrificial  process.  On  the
sacrificial altar, five kinds of offerings are made into five kinds of fire. The five
kinds of fire are conceived of as the heavenly planets, clouds, the earth, man
and woman, and the five kinds of sacrificial offerings are faith, the enjoyer on
the moon, rain, grains and semen.

In  the  process  of  sacrifice,  the  living  entity  makes  specific  sacrifices  to
attain  specific  heavenly  planets  and  consequently  reaches  them.  When  the
merit of sacrifice is exhausted, the living entity descends to earth in the form
of rain, then takes on the form of grains, and the grains are eaten by man and
transformed  into  semen,  which  impregnates  a  woman,  and  thus  the  living
entity  once  again  attains  the  human  form  to  perform  sacrifice  and  so  repeat
the same cycle. In this way, the living entity perpetually comes and goes on the
material path. The Kåñëa conscious person, however, avoids such sacrifices. He
takes directly to Kåñëa consciousness and thereby prepares himself to return to
Godhead.

Impersonalist  commentators  on  the  Bhagavad-gétä  unreasonably  assume
that Brahman takes the form of jéva in the material world, and to substantiate
this  they  refer  to  Chapter  Fifteen,  verse  7,  of  the  Gétä.  But  in  this  verse  the
Lord  also  speaks  of  the  living  entity  as  “an  eternal  fragment  of  Myself.”  The
fragment of God, the living entity, may fall down into the material world, but
the Supreme Lord (Acyuta) never falls down. Therefore this assumption that
the  Supreme  Brahman  assumes  the  form  of  jéva  is  not  acceptable.  It  is
important to remember that in Vedic literature Brahman (the living entity) is
distinguished from Parabrahman (the Supreme Lord).

TEXT  4

AiDa>aUTa& +arae >aav" PauåzêaiDadEvTaMa( )

AiDaYajae_hMaeva}a dehe deh>a*Taa& vr )) 4 ))

adhibhütaà kñaro bhävaù
puruñaç cädhidaivatam
adhiyajïo ’ham evätra
dehe deha-bhåtäà vara

SYNONYMS

adhibhütam—the physical manifestation; kñaraù—constantly changing;
bhävaù—nature; puruñaù—the universal form, including all the demigods, like
the sun and moon; ca—and; adhidaivatam—called adhidaiva; adhiyajïaù—the
Supersoul; aham—I (Kåñëa); eva—certainly; atra—in this; dehe—body;
deha-bhåtäm—of the embodied; vara—O best.

TRANSLATION

O best of the embodied beings, the physical nature, which is constantly
changing, is called adhibhüta [the material manifestation]. The universal form
of the Lord, which includes all the demigods, like those of the sun and moon, is
called adhidaiva. And I, the Supreme Lord, represented as the Supersoul in the
heart of every embodied being, am called adhiyajïa [the Lord of sacrifice].

PURPORT

The physical nature is constantly changing. Material bodies generally pass
through  six  stages:  they  are  born,  they  grow,  they  remain  for  some  duration,
they  produce  some  by-products,  they  dwindle,  and  then  they  vanish.  This
physical nature is called adhibhüta. It is created at a certain point and will be
annihilated  at  a  certain  point.  The  conception  of  the  universal  form  of  the
Supreme Lord, which includes all the demigods and their different planets, is
called  adhidaivata.  And  present  in  the  body  along  with  the  individual  soul  is

the Supersoul, a plenary representation of Lord Kåñëa. The Supersoul is called
the  Paramätmä  or  adhiyajïa  and  is  situated  in  the  heart.  The  word  eva  is
particularly  important  in  the  context  of  this  verse  because  by  this  word  the
Lord  stresses  that  the  Paramätmä  is  not  different  from  Him.  The  Supersoul,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, seated beside the individual soul, is the
witness of the individual soul’s activities and is the source of the soul’s various
types of consciousness. The Supersoul gives the individual soul an opportunity
to  act  freely  and  witnesses  his  activities.  The  functions  of  all  these  different
manifestations  of  the  Supreme  Lord  automatically  become  clarified  for  the
pure  Kåñëa  conscious  devotee  engaged  in  transcendental  service  to  the  Lord.
The gigantic universal form of the Lord called adhidaivata is contemplated by
the neophyte who cannot approach the Supreme Lord in His manifestation as
Supersoul.  The  neophyte  is  advised  to  contemplate  the  universal  form,  or
viräö-puruña,  whose  legs  are  considered  the  lower  planets,  whose  eyes  are
considered  the  sun  and  moon,  and  whose  head  is  considered  the  upper
planetary system.

TEXT  5

ANTak-ale/ c MaaMaev SMarNMau¤-a k-le/vrMa( )

Ya" Pa[YaaiTa Sa MaÙav& YaaiTa NaaSTYa}a Sa&XaYa" )) 5 ))

anta-käle ca mäm eva
smaran muktvä kalevaram
yaù prayäti sa mad-bhävaà
yäti nästy atra saàçayaù

SYNONYMS

anta-käle—at the end of life; ca—also; mäm—Me; eva—certainly;
smaran—remembering; muktvä—quitting; kalevaram—the body; yaù—he
who; prayäti—goes; saù—he; mat-bhävam—My nature; yäti—achieves;
na—not; asti—there is; atra—here; saàçayaù—doubt.

TRANSLATION

And whoever, at the end of his life, quits his body, remembering Me alone,

at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  the  importance  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  stressed.  Anyone
who  quits  his  body  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  at  once  transferred  to  the
transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is the purest of
the  pure.  Therefore  anyone  who  is  constantly  Kåñëa  conscious  is  also  the
purest  of  the  pure.  The  word  smaran  (“remembering”)  is  important.
Remembrance  of  Kåñëa  is  not  possible  for  the  impure  soul  who  has  not
practiced  Kåñëa  consciousness  in  devotional  service.  Therefore  one  should
practice Kåñëa consciousness from the very beginning of life. If one wants to
achieve  success  at  the  end  of  his  life,  the  process  of  remembering  Kåñëa  is
essential.  Therefore  one 
the
mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma,
Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. Lord Caitanya has advised that one be as
tolerant as a tree (taror iva sahiñëunä). There may be so many impediments for
a  person  who  is  chanting  Hare  Kåñëa.  Nonetheless,  tolerating  all  these
impediments,  one  should  continue  to  chant  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, so that at
the end of one’s life one can have the full benefit of Kåñëa consciousness.

should  constantly, 

incessantly  chant 

TEXT  6

Ya& Ya& vaiPa SMarN>aav& TYaJaTYaNTae k-le/vrMa( )

Ta& TaMaevEiTa k-aENTaeYa Sada TaÙav>aaivTa" )) 6 ))

yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà
tyajaty ante kalevaram
taà tam evaiti kaunteya

sadä tad-bhäva-bhävitaù

SYNONYMS

yam yam—whatever; vä api—at all; smaran—remembering; bhävam—nature;
tyajati—gives up; ante—at the end; kalevaram—this body; tam tam—similar;
eva—certainly; eti—gets; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; sadä—always; tat—that;
bhäva—state of being; bhävitaù—remembering.

TRANSLATION

Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, O son of

Kunté, that state he will attain without fail.

PURPORT

The  process  of  changing  one’s  nature  at  the  critical  moment  of  death  is
here explained. A person who at the end of his life quits his body thinking of
Kåñëa attains the transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord, but it is not true
that  a  person  who  thinks  of  something  other  than  Kåñëa  attains  the  same
transcendental  state.  This  is  a  point  we  should  note  very  carefully.  How  can
one  die  in  the  proper  state  of  mind?  Mahäräja  Bharata,  although  a  great
personality, thought of a deer at the end of his life, and so in his next life he
was transferred into the body of a deer. Although as a deer he remembered his
past  activities,  he  had  to  accept  that  animal  body.  Of  course,  one’s  thoughts
during  the  course  of  one’s  life  accumulate  to  influence  one’s  thoughts  at  the
moment of death, so this life creates one’s next life. If in one’s present life one
lives in the mode of goodness and always thinks of Kåñëa, it is possible for one
to remember Kåñëa at the end of one’s life. That will help one be transferred to
the  transcendental  nature  of  Kåñëa.  If  one  is  transcendentally  absorbed  in
Kåñëa’s  service,  then  his  next  body  will  be  transcendental  (spiritual),  not
material.  Therefore  the  chanting  of  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare is the best process
for successfully changing one’s state of being at the end of one’s life.

TEXT  7

TaSMaaTSaveRzu k-ale/zu MaaMaNauSMar YauDYa c )

MaYYaiPaRTaMaNaaebuiÖMaaRMaevEZYaSYaSa&XaYa" )) 7 ))

tasmät sarveñu käleñu
mäm anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
mäm evaiñyasy asaàçayaù

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; sarveñu—at all; käleñu—times; mäm—Me; anusmara—go
on remembering; yudhya—fight; ca—also; mayi—unto Me;
arpita—surrendering; manaù—mind; buddhiù—intellect; mäm—unto Me;
eva—surely; eñyasi—you will attain; asaàçayaù—beyond a doubt.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Kåñëa and
at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With your activities
dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me, you will attain Me
without doubt.

PURPORT

This  instruction  to  Arjuna  is  very  important  for  all  men  engaged  in
material  activities.  The  Lord  does  not  say  that  one  should  give  up  his
prescribed  duties  or  engagements.  One  can  continue  them  and  at  the  same
time think of Kåñëa by chanting Hare Kåñëa. This will free one from material
contamination  and  engage  the  mind  and  intelligence  in  Kåñëa.  By  chanting
Kåñëa’s  names,  one  will  be  transferred  to  the  supreme  planet,  Kåñëaloka,
without a doubt.

TEXT  8

A>YaaSaYaaeGaYau¢e-Na ceTaSaa NaaNYaGaaiMaNaa )

ParMa& Pauåz& idVYa& YaaiTa PaaQaaRNauicNTaYaNa( )) 8 ))

abhyäsa-yoga-yuktena
cetasä nänya-gäminä
paramaà puruñaà divyaà
yäti pärthänucintayan

SYNONYMS

abhyäsa-yoga—by practice; yuktena—being engaged in meditation; cetasä—by
the mind and intelligence; na anya-gäminä—without their being deviated;
paramam—the Supreme; puruñam—Personality of Godhead;
divyam—transcendental; yäti—one achieves; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
anucintayan—constantly thinking of.

TRANSLATION

He who meditates on Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind

constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, O
Pärtha, is sure to reach Me.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  Lord  Kåñëa  stresses  the  importance  of  remembering  Him.
One’s memory of Kåñëa is revived by chanting the mahä-mantra, Hare Kåñëa.
By this practice of chanting and hearing the sound vibration of the Supreme
Lord, one’s ear, tongue and mind are engaged. This mystic meditation is very
easy  to  practice,  and  it  helps  one  attain  the  Supreme  Lord.  Puruñam  means
enjoyer.  Although  living  entities  belong  to  the  marginal  energy  of  the
Supreme  Lord,  they  are  in  material  contamination.  They  think  themselves

enjoyers,  but  they  are  not  the  supreme  enjoyer.  Here  it  is  clearly  stated  that
the  supreme  enjoyer  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  in  His  different
manifestations and plenary expansions as Näräyaëa, Väsudeva, etc.

The  devotee  can  constantly  think  of  the  object  of  worship,  the  Supreme
Lord, in any of His features—Näräyaëa, Kåñëa, Räma, etc.—by chanting Hare
Kåñëa.  This  practice  will  purify  him,  and  at  the  end  of  his  life,  due  to  his
constant chanting, he will be transferred to the kingdom of God. Yoga practice
is meditation on the Supersoul within; similarly, by chanting Hare Kåñëa one
fixes his mind always on the Supreme Lord. The mind is fickle, and therefore
it  is  necessary  to  engage  the  mind  by  force  to  think  of  Kåñëa.  One  example
often given is that of the caterpillar that thinks of becoming a butterfly and so
is  transformed  into  a  butterfly  in  the  same  life.  Similarly,  if  we  constantly
think of Kåñëa, it is certain that at the end of our lives we shall have the same
bodily constitution as Kåñëa.

TEXT  9

k-iv& Paura<aMaNauXaaiSaTaar‚

 Ma<aaer<aqYaa&SaMaNauSMareÛ" )

SavRSYa DaaTaarMaicNTYaæPa‚

 MaaidTYav<a| TaMaSa" ParSTaaTa( )) 9 ))

kavià puräëam anuçäsitäram
aëor aëéyäàsam anusmared yaù
sarvasya dhätäram acintya-rüpam
äditya-varëaà tamasaù parastät

SYNONYMS

kavim—the one who knows everything; puräëam—the oldest;
anuçäsitäram—the controller; aëoù—than the atom; aëéyäàsam—smaller;
anusmaret—always thinks of; yaù—one who; sarvasya—of everything;
dhätäram—the maintainer; acintya—inconceivable; rüpam—whose form;

äditya-varëam—luminous like the sun; tamasaù—to darkness;
parastät—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows
everything, as He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who is smaller than
the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who is beyond all material
conception, who is inconceivable, and who is always a person. He is luminous
like the sun, and He is transcendental, beyond this material nature.

PURPORT

The  process  of  thinking  of  the  Supreme  is  mentioned  in  this  verse.  The
foremost point is that He is not impersonal or void. One cannot meditate on
something impersonal or void. That is very difficult. The process of thinking of
Kåñëa, however, is very easy and is factually stated herein. First of all, the Lord
is puruña, a person—we think of the person Räma and the person Kåñëa. And
whether one thinks of Räma or of Kåñëa, what He is like is described in this
verse  of  Bhagavad-gétä.  The  Lord  is  kavi;  that  is,  He  knows  past,  present  and
future and therefore knows everything. He is the oldest personality because He
is  the  origin  of  everything;  everything  is  born  out  of  Him.  He  is  also  the
supreme controller of the universe, and He is the maintainer and instructor of
humanity.  He  is  smaller  than  the  smallest.  The  living  entity  is  one
ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair, but the Lord is so inconceivably small
that  He  enters  into  the  heart  of  this  particle.  Therefore  He  is  called  smaller
than the smallest. As the Supreme, He can enter into the atom and into the
heart of the smallest and control him as the Supersoul. Although so small, He
is still all-pervading and is maintaining everything. By Him all these planetary
systems are sustained. We often wonder how these big planets are floating in
the air. It is stated here that the Supreme Lord, by His inconceivable energy, is
sustaining  all  these  big  planets  and  systems  of  galaxies.  The  word  acintya
(“inconceivable”)  is  very  significant  in  this  connection.  God’s  energy  is
beyond  our  conception,  beyond  our  thinking  jurisdiction,  and  is  therefore

called  inconceivable  (acintya).  Who  can  argue  this  point?  He  pervades  this
material world and yet is beyond it. We cannot comprehend even this material
world, which is insignificant compared to the spiritual world—so how can we
comprehend what is beyond? Acintya means that which is beyond this material
world,  that  which  our  argument,  logic  and  philosophical  speculation  cannot
touch,  that  which  is  inconceivable.  Therefore  intelligent  persons,  avoiding
useless  argument  and  speculation,  should  accept  what  is  stated  in  scriptures
like  the  Vedas,  Bhagavad-gétä  and  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  and  follow  the
principles they set down. This will lead one to understanding.

TEXT  10

Pa[Yaa<ak-ale/ MaNaSaacle/Na

 >a¢-ya Yau¢-ae YaaeGable/Na cEv )

>a]uvaeMaRDYae Pa[a<aMaaveXYa SaMYa‚

 KSa Ta& Par& PauåzMauPaEiTa idVYaMa( )) 10 ))

prayäëa-käle manasäcalena
bhaktyä yukto yoga-balena caiva
bhruvor madhye präëam äveçya samyak
sa taà paraà puruñam upaiti divyam

SYNONYMS

prayäëa-käle—at the time of death; manasä—by the mind; acalena—without
its being deviated; bhaktyä—in full devotion; yuktaù—engaged;
yoga-balena—by the power of mystic yoga; ca—also; eva—certainly;
bhruvoù—the two eyebrows; madhye—between; präëam—the life air;
äveçya—establishing; samyak—completely; saù—he; tam—that;
param—transcendental; puruñam—Personality of Godhead; upaiti—achieves;
divyam—in the spiritual kingdom.

TRANSLATION

One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows and,

by the strength of yoga, with an undeviating mind, engages himself in
remembering the Supreme Lord in full devotion, will certainly attain to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly stated that at the time of death the mind must be
fixed in devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those practiced
in yoga, it is recommended that they raise the life force between the eyebrows
(to  the  äjïä-cakra).  The  practice  of  ñaö-cakra-yoga,  involving  meditation  on
the six cakras, is suggested here. A pure devotee does not practice such yoga,
but  because  he  is  always  engaged  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  at  death  he  can
remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead by His grace. This is explained
in verse fourteen.

The  particular  use  of  the  word  yoga-balena  is  significant  in  this  verse
because without practice of yoga—whether ñaö-cakra-yoga or bhakti-yoga—one
cannot  come  to  this  transcendental  state  of  being  at  the  time  of  death.  One
cannot  suddenly  remember  the  Supreme  Lord  at  death;  one  must  have
practiced  some  yoga  system,  especially  the  system  of  bhakti-yoga.  Since  one’s
mind  at  death  is  very  disturbed,  one  should  practice  transcendence  through
yoga during one’s life.

TEXT  11

Yad+ar& vedivdae vdiNTa

 ivXaiNTa YaÛTaYaae vqTaraGaa" )

YaidC^NTaae b]øcYa| criNTa

 Tatae Pad& Sa°he<a Pa[v+Yae )) 11 ))

yad akñaraà veda-vido vadanti
viçanti yad yatayo véta-rägäù

yad icchanto brahmacaryaà caranti
tat te padaà saìgraheëa pravakñye

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; akñaram—syllable oà; veda-vidaù—persons conversant with
the Vedas; vadanti—say; viçanti—enter; yat—in which; yatayaù—great sages;
véta-rägäù—in the renounced order of life; yat—that which;
icchantaù—desiring; brahmacaryam—celibacy; caranti—practice; tat—that;
te—unto you; padam—situation; saìgraheëa—in summary; pravakñye—I shall
explain.

TRANSLATION

Persons who are learned in the Vedas, who utter oàkära and who are great
sages in the renounced order enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection, one
practices celibacy. I shall now briefly explain to you this process by which one
may attain salvation.

PURPORT

Lord Çré Kåñëa has recommended to Arjuna the practice of ñaö-cakra-yoga,
in which one places the air of life between the eyebrows. Taking it for granted
that Arjuna might not know how to practice ñaö-cakra-yoga, the Lord explains
the process in the following verses. The Lord says that Brahman, although one
without  a  second,  has  various  manifestations  and  features.  Especially  for  the
impersonalists,  the  akñara,  or  oàkära—the  syllable  oà—is  identical  with
Brahman.  Kåñëa  here  explains  the  impersonal  Brahman,  in  which  the
renounced order of sages enter.

In  the  Vedic  system  of  knowledge,  students,  from  the  very  beginning,  are
taught to vibrate oà and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahman by living
with the spiritual master in complete celibacy. In this way they realize two of
Brahman’s  features.  This  practice 
is  very  essential  for  the  student’s
advancement in spiritual life, but at the moment such brahmacäré (unmarried

celibate)  life  is  not  at  all  possible.  The  social  construction  of  the  world  has
changed so much that there is no possibility of one’s practicing celibacy from
the  beginning  of  student  life.  Throughout  the  world  there  are  many
institutions for different departments of knowledge, but there is no recognized
institution  where  students  can  be  educated  in  the  brahmacäré  principles.
Unless  one  practices  celibacy,  advancement  in  spiritual  life  is  very  difficult.
Therefore  Lord  Caitanya  has  announced,  according  to  the  scriptural
injunctions  for  this  Age  of  Kali,  that  in  this  age  no  process  of  realizing  the
Supreme is possible except the chanting of the holy names of Lord Kåñëa: Hare
Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,  Räma
Räma, Hare Hare.

TEXT  12

SavRÜarai<a Sa&YaMYa MaNaae ôid iNaåDYa c )

MaUDNYaaRDaaYaaTMaNa" Pa[a<aMaaiSQaTaae YaaeGaDaar<aaMa( )) 12 ))

sarva-dväräëi saàyamya
mano hådi nirudhya ca
mürdhny ädhäyätmanaù präëam
ästhito yoga-dhäraëäm

SYNONYMS

sarva-dväräëi—all the doors of the body; saàyamya—controlling; manaù—the
mind; hådi—in the heart; nirudhya—confining; ca—also; mürdhni—on the
head; ädhäya—fixing; ätmanaù—of the soul; präëam—the life air;
ästhitaù—situated in; yoga-dhäraëäm—the yogic situation.

TRANSLATION

The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements.
Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heart and the life
air at the top of the head, one establishes himself in yoga.

PURPORT

To  practice  yoga  as  suggested  here,  one  first  has  to  close  the  doors  of  all
sense enjoyment. This practice is called pratyähära, or withdrawing the senses
from  the  sense  objects.  The  sense  organs  for  acquiring  knowledge—the  eyes,
ears,  nose,  tongue  and  touch—should  be  fully  controlled  and  should  not  be
allowed  to  engage  in  self-gratification.  In  this  way  the  mind  focuses  on  the
Supersoul in the heart, and the life force is raised to the top of the head. In the
Sixth Chapter this process is described in detail. But as mentioned before, this
practice is not practical in this age. The best process is Kåñëa consciousness. If
one is always able to fix his mind on Kåñëa in devotional service, it is very easy
for him to remain in an undisturbed transcendental trance, or in samädhi.

TEXT  13

p wTYaek-a+ar& b]ø VYaahrNMaaMaNauSMarNa( )

Ya" Pa[YaaiTa TYaJaNdeh& Sa YaaiTa ParMaa& GaiTaMa( )) 13 ))

oà ity ekäkñaraà brahma
vyäharan mäm anusmaran
yaù prayäti tyajan dehaà
sa yäti paramäà gatim

SYNONYMS

oà—the combination of letters oà (oàkära); iti—thus; eka-akñaram—the one
syllable; brahma—absolute; vyäharan—vibrating; mäm—Me (Kåñëa);
anusmaran—remembering; yaù—anyone who; prayäti—leaves;
tyajan—quitting; deham—this body; saù—he; yäti—achieves; paramäm—the
supreme; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred syllable

oà, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainly reach the spiritual
planets.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated here that oà, Brahman and Lord Kåñëa are not different.
The impersonal sound of Kåñëa is oà, but the sound Hare Kåñëa contains oà.
The chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra is clearly recommended for this age.
So  if  one  quits  his  body  at  the  end  of  life  chanting  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, he
certainly  reaches  one  of  the  spiritual  planets,  according  to  the  mode  of  his
practice.  The  devotees  of  Kåñëa  enter  the  Kåñëa  planet,  Goloka  Våndävana.
For  the  personalists  there  are  also  innumerable  other  planets,  known  as
Vaikuëöha  planets,  in  the  spiritual  sky,  whereas  the  impersonalists  remain  in
the brahmajyoti.

TEXT  14

ANaNYaceTaa" SaTaTa& Yaae Maa& SMariTa iNaTYaXa" )

TaSYaah& Saul/>a" PaaQaR iNaTYaYau¢-SYa YaaeiGaNa" )) 14 ))

ananya-cetäù satataà
yo mäà smarati nityaçaù
tasyähaà sulabhaù pärtha
nitya-yuktasya yoginaù

SYNONYMS

ananya-cetäù—without deviation of the mind; satatam—always; yaù—anyone
who; mäm—Me (Kåñëa); smarati—remembers; nityaçaù—regularly; tasya—to
him; aham—I am; su-labhaù—very easy to achieve; pärtha—O son of Påthä;

nitya—regularly; yuktasya—engaged; yoginaù—for the devotee.

TRANSLATION

For one who always remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O

son of Påthä, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.

PURPORT

This  verse  especially  describes  the  final  destination  attained  by  the
unalloyed  devotees  who  serve  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  in
bhakti-yoga.  Previous  verses  have  mentioned  four  different  kinds  of
devotees—the  distressed,  the  inquisitive,  those  who  seek  material  gain,  and
the  speculative  philosophers.  Different  processes  of  liberation  have  also  been
described: karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga and haöha-yoga. The principles of these yoga
systems  have  some  bhakti  added,  but  this  verse  particularly  mentions  pure
bhakti-yoga, without any mixture of jïäna, karma or haöha. As indicated by the
word ananya-cetäù, in pure bhakti-yoga the devotee desires nothing but Kåñëa.
A  pure  devotee  does  not  desire  promotion  to  heavenly  planets,  nor  does  he
seek  oneness  with  the  brahmajyoti  or  salvation  or  liberation  from  material
entanglement.  A  pure  devotee  does  not  desire  anything. 
the
Caitanya-caritämåta  the  pure  devotee  is  called  niñkäma,  which  means  he  has
no desire for self-interest. Perfect peace belongs to him alone, not to them who
strive for personal gain. Whereas a jïäna-yogé, karma-yogé or haöha-yogé has his
own selfish interests, a perfect devotee has no desire other than to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord says that for anyone who
is unflinchingly devoted to Him, He is easy to attain.

In 

A pure devotee always engages in devotional service to Kåñëa in one of His
various  personal  features.  Kåñëa  has  various  plenary  expansions  and
incarnations, such as Räma and Nåsiàha, and a devotee can choose to fix his
mind  in  loving  service  to  any  of  these  transcendental  forms  of  the  Supreme
Lord.  Such  a  devotee  meets  with  none  of  the  problems  that  plague  the
practitioners  of  other  yogas.  Bhakti-yoga  is  very  simple  and  pure  and  easy  to
perform. One can begin simply by chanting Hare Kåñëa. The Lord is merciful

to all, but as we have already explained, He is especially inclined toward those
who  always  serve  Him  without  deviation.  The  Lord  helps  such  devotees  in
various ways. As stated in the Vedas (Kaöha Upaniñad 1.2.23), yam evaiña våëute
tena labhyas/ tasyaiña ätmä vivåëute tanuà sväm: one who is fully surrendered
and  engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord  can  understand
the  Supreme  Lord  as  He  is.  And  as  stated  in Bhagavad-gétä  (10.10),  dadämi
buddhi-yogaà tam: the Lord gives such a devotee sufficient intelligence so that
ultimately the devotee can attain Him in His spiritual kingdom.

The special qualification of the pure devotee is that he is always thinking of
Kåñëa  without  deviation  and  without  considering  the  time  or  place.  There
should be no impediments. He should be able to carry out his service anywhere
and at any time. Some say that the devotee should remain in holy places like
Våndävana  or  some  holy  town  where  the  Lord  lived,  but  a  pure  devotee  can
live  anywhere  and  create  the  atmosphere  of  Våndävana  by  his  devotional
service.  It  was  Çré  Advaita  who  told  Lord  Caitanya,  “Wherever  You  are,  O
Lord—there is Våndävana.”

As  indicated  by  the  words  satatam  and  nityaçaù,  which  mean  “always,”
“regularly,”  or  “every  day,”  a  pure  devotee  constantly  remembers  Kåñëa  and
meditates  upon  Him.  These  are  qualifications  of  the  pure  devotee  for  whom
the  Lord  is  most  easily  attainable.  Bhakti-yoga  is  the  system  that  the  Gétä
recommends  above  all  others.  Generally,  the  bhakti-yogés  are  engaged  in  five
different  ways:  (1)  çänta-bhakta,  engaged  in  devotional  service  in  neutrality;
(2) däsya-bhakta, engaged in devotional service as servant; (3) säkhya-bhakta,
engaged  as  friend;  (4)  vätsalya-bhakta,  engaged  as  parent;  and  (5)
mädhurya-bhakta,  engaged  as  conjugal  lover  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  In  any  of
these  ways,  the  pure  devotee 
in  the
transcendental  loving  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord  and  cannot  forget  the
Supreme  Lord,  and  so  for  him  the  Lord  is  easily  attained.  A  pure  devotee
cannot forget the Supreme Lord for a moment, and similarly the Supreme Lord
cannot forget His pure devotee for a moment. This is the great blessing of the
Kåñëa  conscious  process  of  chanting  the  mahä-mantra—Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare
Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare
Hare.

is  always  constantly  engaged 

TEXT  15

MaaMauPaeTYa PauNaJaRNMa du"%al/YaMaXaaìTaMa( )

NaaPanuviNTa MahaTMaaNa" Sa&iSaiÖ& ParMaa& GaTaa" )) 15 ))

mäm upetya punar janma
duùkhälayam açäçvatam
näpnuvanti mahätmänaù
saàsiddhià paramäà gatäù

SYNONYMS

mäm—Me; upetya—achieving; punaù—again; janma—birth;
duùkha-älayam—place of miseries; açäçvatam—temporary; na—never;
äpnuvanti—attain; mahä-ätmänaù—the great souls; saàsiddhim—perfection;
paramäm—ultimate; gatäù—having achieved.

TRANSLATION

After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogés in devotion, never return

to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained
the highest perfection.

PURPORT

Since this temporary material world is full of the miseries of birth, old age,
disease  and  death,  naturally  he  who  achieves  the  highest  perfection  and
attains  the  supreme  planet,  Kåñëaloka,  Goloka  Våndävana,  does  not  wish  to
return.  The  supreme  planet  is  described  in  Vedic  literature  as  avyakta  and
akñara  and  paramä  gati;  in  other  words,  that  planet  is  beyond  our  material
vision, and it is inexplicable, but it is the highest goal, the destination for the
mahätmäs  (great  souls).  The  mahätmäs  receive  transcendental  messages  from
the  realized  devotees  and  thus  gradually  develop  devotional  service  in  Kåñëa

consciousness and become so absorbed in transcendental service that they no
longer desire elevation to any of the material planets, nor do they even want to
be  transferred  to  any  spiritual  planet.  They  only  want  Kåñëa  and  Kåñëa’s
association, and nothing else. That is the highest perfection of life. This verse
specifically  mentions  the  personalist  devotees  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  Kåñëa.
These devotees in Kåñëa consciousness achieve the highest perfection of life.
In other words, they are the supreme souls.

TEXT  16

Aab]ø>auvNaaçaek-a" PauNaraviTaRNaae_JauRNa )

MaaMauPaeTYa Tau k-aENTaeYa PauNaJaRNMa Na ivÛTae )) 16 ))

ä-brahma-bhuvanäl lokäù
punar ävartino ’rjuna
mäm upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate

SYNONYMS

ä-brahma-bhuvanät—up to the Brahmaloka planet; lokäù—the planetary
systems; punaù—again; ävartinaù—returning; arjuna—O Arjuna; mäm—unto
Me; upetya—arriving; tu—but; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; punaù
janma—rebirth; na—never; vidyate—takes place.

TRANSLATION

From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are

places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one who
attains to My abode, O son of Kunté, never takes birth again.

PURPORT

All  kinds  of  yogés—karma,  jïäna,  haöha,  etc.—eventually  have  to  attain

devotional perfection in bhakti-yoga, or Kåñëa consciousness, before they can
go  to  Kåñëa’s  transcendental  abode  and  never  return.  Those  who  attain  the
highest  material  planets,  the  planets  of  the  demigods,  are  again  subjected  to
repeated birth and death. As persons on earth are elevated to higher planets,
people  on  higher  planets  such  as  Brahmaloka,  Candraloka  and  Indraloka  fall
down to earth. The practice of sacrifice called païcägni-vidyä, recommended in
the  Chändogya  Upaniñad,  enables  one  to  achieve  Brahmaloka,  but  if,  on
Brahmaloka, one does not cultivate Kåñëa consciousness, then he must return
to earth. Those who progress in Kåñëa consciousness on the higher planets are
gradually  elevated  to  higher  and  higher  planets  and  at  the  time  of  universal
devastation  are  transferred  to  the  eternal  spiritual  kingdom.  Çrédhara  Svämé,
in his commentary on Bhagavad-gétä, quotes this verse:

brahmaëä saha te sarve
sampräpte pratisaïcare
parasyänte kåtätmänaù
praviçanti paraà padam

“When  there  is  devastation  of  this  material  universe,  Brahmä  and  his
devotees,  who  are  constantly  engaged  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  are  all
transferred to the spiritual universe and to specific spiritual planets according
to their desires.”

TEXT  17

SahóYauGaPaYaRNTaMahYaRd(b]ø<aae ivdu" )

rai}a& YauGaSahóaNTaa& Tae_haera}aivdae JaNaa" )) 17 ))

sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmaëo viduù
rätrià yuga-sahasräntäà
te ’ho-rätra-vido janäù

SYNONYMS

sahasra—one thousand; yuga—millenniums; paryantam—including;
ahaù—day; yat—that which; brahmaëaù—of Brahmä; viduù—they know;
rätrim—night; yuga—millenniums; sahasra-antäm—similarly, ending after
one thousand; te—they; ahaù-rätra—day and night; vidaù—who understand;
janäù—people.

TRANSLATION

By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together form the duration of

Brahmä’s one day. And such also is the duration of his night.

PURPORT

The duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in cycles of
kalpas.  A  kalpa  is  a  day  of  Brahmä,  and  one  day  of  Brahmä  consists  of  a
thousand  cycles  of  four  yugas,  or  ages:  Satya,  Tretä,  Dväpara  and  Kali.  The
cycle  of  Satya  is  characterized  by  virtue,  wisdom  and  religion,  there  being
practically  no  ignorance  and  vice,  and  the  yuga  lasts  1,728,000  years.  In  the
Tretä-yuga  vice  is  introduced,  and  this  yuga  lasts  1,296,000  years.  In  the
Dväpara-yuga  there  is  an  even  greater  decline  in  virtue  and  religion,  vice
increasing,  and  this  yuga  lasts  864,000  years.  And  finally  in  Kali-yuga  (the
yuga  we  have  now  been  experiencing  over  the  past  5,000  years)  there  is  an
abundance of strife, ignorance, irreligion and vice, true virtue being practically
nonexistent,  and  this  yuga  lasts  432,000  years.  In  Kali-yuga  vice  increases  to
such  a  point  that  at  the  termination  of  the  yuga  the  Supreme  Lord  Himself
appears as the Kalki avatära, vanquishes the demons, saves His devotees, and
commences  another  Satya-yuga.  Then  the  process  is  set  rolling  again.  These
four  yugas,  rotating  a  thousand  times,  comprise  one  day  of  Brahmä,  and  the
same  number  comprise  one  night.  Brahmä  lives  one  hundred  of  such  “years”
and then dies. These “hundred years” by earth calculations total to 311 trillion
and  40  billion  earth  years.  By  these  calculations  the  life  of  Brahmä  seems
fantastic and interminable, but from the viewpoint of eternity it is as brief as a
lightning  flash.  In  the  Causal  Ocean  there  are  innumerable  Brahmäs  rising
and disappearing like bubbles in the Atlantic. Brahmä and his creation are all

part of the material universe, and therefore they are in constant flux.

In the material universe not even Brahmä is free from the process of birth,
old age, disease and death. Brahmä, however, is directly engaged in the service
of  the  Supreme  Lord  in  the  management  of  this  universe—therefore  he  at
once attains liberation. Elevated sannyäsés are promoted to Brahmä’s particular
planet, Brahmaloka, which is the highest planet in the material universe and
which  survives  all  the  heavenly  planets  in  the  upper  strata  of  the  planetary
system,  but  in  due  course  Brahmä  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  Brahmaloka  are
subject to death, according to the law of material nature.

TEXT  18

AVYa¢-aÜy¢-Ya" SavaR" Pa[>avNTYahraGaMae )

ra}YaaGaMae Pa[l/IYaNTae Ta}aEvaVYa¢-Sa&jke- )) 18 ))

avyaktäd vyaktayaù sarväù
prabhavanty ahar-ägame
rätry-ägame praléyante
tatraivävyakta-saàjïake

SYNONYMS

avyaktät—from the unmanifest; vyaktayaù—living entities; sarväù—all;
prabhavanti—become manifest; ahaù-ägame—at the beginning of the day;
rätri-ägame—at the fall of night; praléyante—are annihilated; tatra—into that;
eva—certainly; avyakta—the unmanifest; saàjïake—which is called.

TRANSLATION

At the beginning of Brahmä’s day, all living entities become manifest from
the unmanifest state, and thereafter, when the night falls, they are merged into
the unmanifest again.

TEXT  19

>aUTaGa]aMa" Sa WvaYa& >aUTva >aUTva Pa[l/IYaTae )

ra}YaaGaMae_vXa" PaaQaR Pa[>avTYahraGaMae )) 19 ))

bhüta-grämaù sa eväyaà
bhütvä bhütvä praléyate
rätry-ägame ’vaçaù pärtha
prabhavaty ahar-ägame

SYNONYMS

bhüta-grämaù—the aggregate of all living entities; saù—these; eva—certainly;
ayam—this; bhütvä bhütvä—repeatedly taking birth; praléyate—is annihilated;
rätri—of night; ägame—on the arrival; avaçaù—automatically; pärtha—O son
of Påthä; prabhavati—is manifest; ahaù—of daytime; ägame—on the arrival.

TRANSLATION

Again and again, when Brahmä’s day arrives, all living entities come into
being, and with the arrival of Brahmä’s night they are helplessly annihilated.

PURPORT

The  less  intelligent,  who  try  to  remain within this material world, may be
elevated  to  higher  planets  and  then  again  must  come  down  to  this  planet
earth.  During  the  daytime  of  Brahmä  they  can  exhibit  their  activities  on
higher  and  lower  planets  within  this  material  world,  but  at  the  coming  of
Brahmä’s night they are all annihilated. In the day they receive various bodies
for  material  activities,  and  at  night  they  no  longer  have  bodies  but  remain
compact in the body of Viñëu. Then again they are manifest at the arrival of
Brahmä’s  day.  Bhütvä  bhütvä  praléyate:  during  the  day  they  become  manifest,
and  at  night  they  are  annihilated  again.  Ultimately,  when  Brahmä’s  life  is
finished,  they  are  all  annihilated  and  remain  unmanifest  for  millions  and
millions of years. And when Brahmä is born again in another millennium they

are again manifest. In this way they are captivated by the spell of the material
world.  But  those  intelligent  persons  who take to Kåñëa consciousness use the
human  life  fully  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord,  chanting  Hare  Kåñëa,
Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,
Hare  Hare.  Thus  they  transfer  themselves,  even  in  this  life,  to  the  spiritual
planet of Kåñëa and become eternally blissful there, not being subject to such
rebirths.

TEXT  20

ParSTaSMaatau >aavae_NYaae_VYa¢-ae_VYa¢-aTSaNaaTaNa" )

Ya" Sa SaveRzu >aUTaezu NaXYaTSau Na ivNaXYaiTa )) 20 ))

paras tasmät tu bhävo ’nyo
’vyakto ’vyaktät sanätanaù
yaù sa sarveñu bhüteñu
naçyatsu na vinaçyati

SYNONYMS

paraù—transcendental; tasmät—to that; tu—but; bhävaù—nature;
anyaù—another; avyaktaù—unmanifest; avyaktät—to the unmanifest;
sanätanaù—eternal; yaù saù—that which; sarveñu—all;
bhüteñu—manifestation; naçyatsu—being annihilated; na—never;
vinaçyati—is annihilated.

TRANSLATION

Yet there is another unmanifest nature, which is eternal and is

transcendental to this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is
never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains as it
is.

PURPORT

Kåñëa’s superior, spiritual energy is transcendental and eternal. It is beyond
all  the  changes  of  material  nature,  which  is  manifest  and  annihilated  during
the days and nights of Brahmä. Kåñëa’s superior energy is completely opposite
in quality to material nature. Superior and inferior nature are explained in the
Seventh Chapter.

TEXT  21

AVYa¢-ae_+ar wTYau¢-STaMaahu" ParMaa& GaiTaMa( )

Ya& Pa[aPYa Na iNavTaRNTae TaÖaMa ParMa& MaMa )) 21 ))

avyakto ’kñara ity uktas
tam ähuù paramäà gatim
yaà präpya na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama

SYNONYMS

avyaktaù—unmanifested; akñaraù—infallible; iti—thus; uktaù—is said;
tam—that; ähuù—is known; paramäm—the ultimate; gatim—destination;
yam—which; präpya—gaining; na—never; nivartante—come back; tat—that;
dhäma—abode; paramam—supreme; mama—My.

TRANSLATION

That which the Vedäntists describe as unmanifest and infallible, that which
is known as the supreme destination, that place from which, having attained it,
one never returns—that is My supreme abode.

PURPORT

The  supreme  abode  of  the  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  is  described  in
the Brahma-saàhitä as cintämaëi-dhäma, a place where all desires are fulfilled.
The  supreme  abode  of  Lord  Kåñëa,  known  as  Goloka  Våndävana,  is  full  of

palaces  made  of  touchstone.  There  are  also  trees,  called  “desire  trees,”  that
supply any type of eatable upon demand, and there are cows, known as surabhi
cows, which supply a limitless supply of milk. In this abode, the Lord is served
by hundreds of thousands of goddesses of fortune (Lakñmés), and He is called
Govinda, the primal Lord and the cause of all causes. The Lord is accustomed
to  blow  His  flute  (veëuà  kvaëantam).  His  transcendental  form  is  the  most
attractive in all the worlds—His eyes are like lotus petals, and the color of His
body is like the color of clouds. He is so attractive that His beauty excels that
of thousands of Cupids. He wears saffron cloth, a garland around His neck and
a  peacock  feather  in  His  hair.  In  the  Bhagavad-gétä  Lord  Kåñëa  gives  only  a
small  hint  of  His  personal abode, Goloka Våndävana, which is the supermost
planet  in  the  spiritual  kingdom.  A  vivid  description  is  given  in  the
Brahma-saàhitä.  Vedic  literatures  (Kaöha Upaniñad  1.3.11)  state  that  there  is
nothing superior to the abode of the Supreme Godhead, and that that abode is
the  ultimate  destination  (puruñän  na  paraà  kiïcit  sä  käñöhä  paramä  gatiù).
When  one  attains  to  it,  he  never  returns  to  the  material  world.  Kåñëa’s
supreme abode and Kåñëa Himself are nondifferent, being of the same quality.
On this earth, Våndävana, ninety miles southeast of Delhi, is a replica of that
supreme  Goloka  Våndävana  located  in  the  spiritual  sky.  When  Kåñëa
descended on this earth, He sported on that particular tract of land known as
Våndävana,  comprising  about  eighty-four  square  miles  in  the  district  of
Mathurä, India.

TEXT  22

Pauåz" Sa Par" PaaQaR >a¢-ya l/>YaSTvNaNYaYaa )

YaSYaaNTa"SQaaiNa >aUTaaiNa YaeNa SavRiMad& TaTaMa( )) 22 ))

puruñaù sa paraù pärtha
bhaktyä labhyas tv ananyayä
yasyäntaù-sthäni bhütäni
yena sarvam idaà tatam

SYNONYMS

puruñaù—the Supreme Personality; saù—He; paraù—the Supreme, than
whom no one is greater; pärtha—O son of Påthä; bhaktyä—by devotional
service; labhyaù—can be achieved; tu—but; ananyayä—unalloyed,
undeviating; yasya—whom; antaù-sthäni—within; bhütäni—all of this
material manifestation; yena—by whom; sarvam—all; idam—whatever we can
see; tatam—is pervaded.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is attainable

by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode, He is
all-pervading, and everything is situated within Him.

PURPORT

It is here clearly stated that the supreme destination, from which there is no
return,  is  the  abode  of  Kåñëa,  the  Supreme  Person.  The  Brahma-saàhitä
describes  this  supreme  abode  as  änanda-cinmaya-rasa,  a  place  where
everything is full of spiritual bliss. All the variegatedness manifest there is of
the quality of spiritual bliss—nothing there is material. That variegatedness is
expanded as the spiritual expansion of the Supreme Godhead Himself, for the
manifestation there is totally of the spiritual energy, as explained in Chapter
Seven. As far as this material world is concerned, although the Lord is always
in His supreme abode, He is nonetheless all-pervading by His material energy.
So  by  His  spiritual  and  material  energies  He  is  present  everywhere—both  in
the  material  and  in  the  spiritual  universes.  Yasyäntaù-sthäni  means  that
everything  is  sustained  within  Him,  within  either  His  spiritual  or  material
energy. The Lord is all-pervading by these two energies.

To  enter  Kåñëa’s  supreme  abode  or  the  innumerable  Vaikuëöha  planets  is
possible  only  by  bhakti,  devotional  service,  as  clearly  indicated  here  by  the
word bhaktyä. No other process can help one attain that supreme abode. The

Vedas  (Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad  3.2)  also  describe  the  supreme  abode  and  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Eko  vaçé  sarva-gaù  kåñëaù.  In  that  abode
there is only one Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose name is Kåñëa. He is
the  supreme  merciful  Deity,  and  although  situated  there  as  one  He  has
expanded Himself into millions and millions of plenary expansions. The Vedas
compare the Lord to a tree standing still yet bearing many varieties of fruits,
flowers and changing leaves. The plenary expansions of the Lord who preside
over the Vaikuëöha planets are four-armed, and they are known by a variety of
names—Puruñottama,  Trivikrama,  Keçava,  Mädhava,  Aniruddha,  Håñékeça,
Saìkarñaëa,  Pradyumna,  Çrédhara,  Väsudeva,  Dämodara, 
Janärdana,
Näräyaëa, Vämana, Padmanäbha, etc.

The Brahma-saàhitä  (5.37)  also  confirms  that  although  the  Lord  is  always
in  the  supreme  abode,  Goloka  Våndävana,  He  is  all-pervading,  so  that
everything is going on nicely (goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù). As stated
in  the  Vedas  (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad  6.8),  paräsya  çaktir  vividhaiva  çrüyate/
sväbhäviké  jïäna-bala-kriyä  ca:  His  energies  are  so  expansive  that  they
systematically conduct everything in the cosmic manifestation without a flaw,
although the Supreme Lord is far, far away.

TEXT  23

Ya}a k-ale/ TvNaav*itaMaav*ita& cEv YaaeiGaNa" )

Pa[YaaTaa YaaiNTa Ta& k-al&/ v+YaaiMa >arTazR>a )) 23 ))

yatra käle tv anävåttim
ävåttià caiva yoginaù
prayätä yänti taà kälaà
vakñyämi bharatarñabha

SYNONYMS

yatra—at which; käle—time; tu—and; anävåttim—no return; ävåttim—return;
ca—also; eva—certainly; yoginaù—different kinds of mystics;

prayätäù—having departed; yänti—attain; tam—that; kälam—time;
vakñyämi—I shall describe; bharata-åñabha—O best of the Bhäratas.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Bhäratas, I shall now explain to you the different times at
which, passing away from this world, the yogé does or does not come back.

PURPORT

The  unalloyed  devotees  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  who  are  totally  surrendered
souls, do not care when they leave their bodies or by what method. They leave
everything in Kåñëa’s hands and so easily and happily return to Godhead. But
those  who  are  not  unalloyed  devotees  and  who  depend  instead  on  such
methods of spiritual realization as karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga and haöha-yoga must
leave the body at a suitable time and thereby be assured whether or not they
will return to the world of birth and death.

If  the  yogé  is  perfect  he  can  select  the  time  and  situation  for  leaving  this
material  world.  But  if  he  is  not  so  expert  his  success  depends  on  his
accidentally  passing  away  at  a  certain  suitable  time.  The  suitable  times  at
which one passes away and does not come back are explained by the Lord in
the  next  verse.  According  to  Äcärya  Baladeva  Vidyäbhüñaëa,  the  Sanskrit
word käla used herein refers to the presiding deity of time.

TEXT  24

AiGanJYaaeRiTarh" éu©-" z<MaaSaa otaraYa<aMa( )

Ta}a Pa[YaaTaa GaC^iNTa b]ø b]øivdae JaNaa" )) 24 ))

agnir jyotir ahaù çuklaù
ñaë-mäsä uttaräyaëam
tatra prayätä gacchanti
brahma brahma-vido janäù

SYNONYMS

agniù—fire; jyotiù—light; ahaù—day; çuklaù—the white fortnight;
ñaö-mäsäù—the six months; uttara-ayanam—when the sun passes on the
northern side; tatra—there; prayätäù—those who pass away; gacchanti—go;
brahma—to the Absolute; brahma-vidaù—who know the Absolute;
janäù—persons.

TRANSLATION

Those who know the Supreme Brahman attain that Supreme by passing
away from the world during the influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an
auspicious moment of the day, during the fortnight of the waxing moon, or
during the six months when the sun travels in the north.

PURPORT

When fire, light, day and the fortnight of the moon are mentioned, it is to
be  understood  that  over  all  of  them  there  are  various  presiding  deities  who
make arrangements for the passage of the soul. At the time of death, the mind
carries  one  on  the  path  to  a  new  life.  If  one  leaves  the  body  at  the  time
designated above, either accidentally or by arrangement, it is possible for him
to  attain  the  impersonal  brahmajyoti.  Mystics  who  are  advanced  in  yoga
practice  can  arrange  the  time  and  place  to  leave  the  body.  Others  have  no
control—if by accident they leave at an auspicious moment, then they will not
return to the cycle of birth and death, but otherwise there is every possibility
that  they  will  have  to  return.  However,  for  the  pure  devotee  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, there is no fear of returning, whether he leaves the body at an
auspicious or inauspicious moment, by accident or arrangement.

TEXT  25

DaUMaae rai}aSTaQaa k*-Z<a" z<MaaSaa di+a<aaYaNaMa( )

Ta}a caNd]MaSa& JYaaeiTaYaaeRGaq Pa[aPYa iNavTaRTae )) 25 ))

dhümo rätris tathä kåñëaù
ñaë-mäsä dakñiëäyanam
tatra cändramasaà jyotir
yogé präpya nivartate

SYNONYMS

dhümaù—smoke; rätriù—night; tathä—also; kåñëaù—the fortnight of the dark
moon; ñaö-mäsäù—the six months; dakñiëa-ayanam—when the sun passes on
the southern side; tatra—there; cändra-masam—the moon planet; jyotiù—the
light; yogé—the mystic; präpya—achieving; nivartate—comes back.

TRANSLATION

The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night,
the fortnight of the waning moon, or the six months when the sun passes to the
south reaches the moon planet but again comes back.

PURPORT

In  the  Third  Canto  of  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  Kapila  Muni  mentions  that
those  who  are  expert  in  fruitive  activities  and  sacrificial  methods  on  earth
attain to the moon at death. These elevated souls live on the moon for about
10,000  years  (by  demigod  calculations)  and  enjoy  life  by  drinking  soma-rasa.
They  eventually  return  to  earth.  This  means  that  on  the  moon  there  are
higher classes of living beings, though they may not be perceived by the gross
senses.

TEXT  26

éu©-k*-Z<ae GaTaq ùeTae JaGaTa" XaaìTae MaTae )

Wk-Yaa YaaTYaNaav*itaMaNYaYaavTaRTae PauNa" )) 26 ))

çukla-kåñëe gaté hy ete
jagataù çäçvate mate
ekayä yäty anävåttim
anyayävartate punaù

SYNONYMS

çukla—light; kåñëe—and darkness; gaté—ways of passing; hi—certainly;
ete—these two; jagataù—of the material world; çäçvate—of the Vedas;
mate—in the opinion; ekayä—by one; yäti—goes; anävåttim—to no return;
anyayä—by the other; ävartate—comes back; punaù—again.

TRANSLATION

According to Vedic opinion, there are two ways of passing from this

world—one in light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does not
come back; but when one passes in darkness, he returns.

PURPORT

The same description of departure and return is quoted by Äcärya Baladeva
Vidyäbhüñaëa  from  the  Chändogya Upaniñad  (5.10.3–5).  Those  who  are
fruitive  laborers  and  philosophical  speculators  from  time  immemorial  are
constantly  going  and  coming.  Actually  they  do  not  attain  ultimate  salvation,
for they do not surrender to Kåñëa.

TEXT  27

NaETae Sa*Taq PaaQaR JaaNaNYaaeGaq MauùiTa k-êNa )

TaSMaaTSaveRzu k-ale/zu YaaeGaYau¢-ae >avaJauRNa )) 27 ))

naite såté pärtha jänan

yogé muhyati kaçcana
tasmät sarveñu käleñu
yoga-yukto bhavärjuna

SYNONYMS

na—never; ete—these two; såté—different paths; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
jänan—even if he knows; yogé—the devotee of the Lord; muhyati—is
bewildered; kaçcana—any; tasmät—therefore; sarveñu käleñu—always;
yoga-yuktaù—engaged in Kåñëa consciousness; bhava—just become;
arjuna—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

Although the devotees know these two paths, O Arjuna, they are never

bewildered. Therefore be always fixed in devotion.

PURPORT

Kåñëa  is  here  advising  Arjuna  that  he  should  not  be  disturbed  by  the
different paths the soul can take when leaving the material world. A devotee
of the Supreme Lord should not worry whether he will depart by arrangement
or  by  accident.  The  devotee  should  be  firmly  established  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  and  chant  Hare  Kåñëa.  He  should  know  that  concern  over
either of these two paths is troublesome. The best way to be absorbed in Kåñëa
consciousness is to be always dovetailed in His service, and this will make one’s
path to the spiritual kingdom safe, certain and direct. The word yoga-yukta is
especially  significant  in  this  verse.  One  who  is  firm  in  yoga  is  constantly
engaged in Kåñëa consciousness in all his activities. Çré Rüpa Gosvämé advises,
anäsaktasya  viñayän  yathärham  upayuïjataù:  one  should  be  unattached  in
material  affairs  and  do  everything  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  By  this  system,
which is called yukta-vairägya, one attains perfection. Therefore the devotee is
not disturbed by these descriptions, because he knows that his passage to the
supreme abode is guaranteed by devotional service.

TEXT  28

vedezu Yajezu TaPa"Sau cEv

 daNaezu YaTPau<Yaf-l&/ Pa[idíMa( )

ATYaeiTa TaTSavRiMad& ividTva

 YaaeGaq Par& SQaaNaMauPaEiTa caÛMa( )) 28 ))

vedeñu yajïeñu tapaùsu caiva
däneñu yat puëya-phalaà pradiñöam
atyeti tat sarvam idaà viditvä
yogé paraà sthänam upaiti cädyam

SYNONYMS

vedeñu—in the study of the Vedas; yajïeñu—in the performances of yajïa,
sacrifice; tapaùsu—in undergoing different types of austerities; ca—also;
eva—certainly; däneñu—in giving charities; yat—that which;
puëya-phalam—result of pious work; pradiñöam—indicated; atyeti—surpasses;
tat sarvam—all those; idam—this; viditvä—knowing; yogé—the devotee;
param—supreme; sthänam—abode; upaiti—achieves; ca—also;
ädyam—original.

TRANSLATION

A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the
results derived from studying the Vedas, performing austere sacrifices, giving
charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. Simply by performing
devotional service, he attains all these, and at the end he reaches the supreme
eternal abode.

PURPORT

This  verse  is  the  summation  of  the  Seventh  and  Eighth  chapters,  which

particularly deal with Kåñëa consciousness and devotional service. One has to
study the Vedas under the guidance of the spiritual master and undergo many
austerities and penances while living under his care. A brahmacäré has to live
in  the  home  of  the  spiritual  master  just  like  a  servant,  and  he  must  beg  alms
from door to door and bring them to the spiritual master. He takes food only
under the master’s order, and if the master neglects to call the student for food
that  day,  the  student  fasts.  These  are  some  of  the  Vedic  principles  for
observing brahmacarya.

After the student studies the Vedas under the master for a period from five
to twenty years, he may become a man of perfect character. Study of the Vedas
is not meant for the recreation of armchair speculators, but for the formation
of  character.  After  this  training,  the  brahmacäré  is  allowed  to  enter  into
household life and marry. When he is a householder, he has to perform many
sacrifices  so  that  he  may  achieve  further  enlightenment.  He  must  also  give
charity  according  to  the  country,  time  and  candidate,  discriminating  among
charity in goodness, in passion and in ignorance, as described in Bhagavad-gétä.
Then  after  retiring  from  household  life,  upon  accepting  the  order  of
vänaprastha,  he  undergoes  severe  penances—living  in  forests,  dressing  with
tree  bark,  not  shaving,  etc.  By  carrying  out  the  orders  of  brahmacarya,
householder  life,  vänaprastha  and  finally  sannyäsa,  one  becomes  elevated  to
the  perfectional  stage  of  life.  Some  are  then  elevated  to  the  heavenly
kingdoms,  and  when  they  become  even  more  advanced  they  are  liberated  in
the  spiritual  sky,  either  in  the  impersonal  brahmajyoti  or  in  the  Vaikuëöha
planets or Kåñëaloka. This is the path outlined by Vedic literatures.

The  beauty  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  however,  is  that  by  one  stroke,  by
engaging in devotional service, one can surpass all the rituals of the different
orders of life.

The  words 

idaà  viditvä  indicate  that  one  should  understand  the
instructions  given  by  Çré  Kåñëa  in  this  chapter  and  the  Seventh  Chapter  of
Bhagavad-gétä. One should try to understand these chapters not by scholarship
or  mental  speculation  but  by  hearing  them  in  association  with  devotees.
Chapters Seven through Twelve are the essence of Bhagavad-gétä. The first six
and the last six chapters are like coverings for the middle six chapters, which

are especially protected by the Lord. If one is fortunate enough to understand
Bhagavad-gétä—especially  these  middle  six  chapters—in  the  association  of
devotees,  then  his  life  at  once  becomes  glorified  beyond  all  penances,
sacrifices,  charities,  speculations,  etc.,  for  one  can  achieve  all  the  results  of
these activities simply by Kåñëa consciousness.

One who has a little faith in Bhagavad-gétä should learn Bhagavad-gétä from
a devotee, because in the beginning of the Fourth Chapter it is stated clearly
that  Bhagavad-gétä  can  be  understood  only  by  devotees;  no  one  else  can
perfectly understand the purpose of Bhagavad-gétä. One should therefore learn
Bhagavad-gétä from a devotee of Kåñëa, not from mental speculators. This is a
sign  of  faith.  When  one  searches  for  a  devotee  and  finally  gets  a  devotee’s
association  one  actually  begins  to  study  and  understand  Bhagavad-gétä.  By
advancement  in  the  association  of  the  devotee  one  is  placed  in  devotional
service, and this service dispels all one’s misgivings about Kåñëa, or God, and
Kåñëa’s  activities,  form,  pastimes,  name  and  other  features.  After  these
misgivings have been perfectly cleared away, one becomes fixed in one’s study.
Then  one  relishes  the  study  of  Bhagavad-gétä  and  attains  the  state  of  feeling
always  Kåñëa  conscious.  In  the  advanced  stage,  one  falls  completely  in  love
with  Kåñëa.  This  highest  perfectional  stage  of  life  enables  the  devotee  to  be
transferred to Kåñëa’s abode in the spiritual sky, Goloka Våndävana, where the
devotee becomes eternally happy.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Attaining the Supreme.

- CHAPTER 9 -
The Most Confidential Knowledge

TEXT  1

é[q>aGavaNauvac

wd& Tau Tae GauùTaMa& Pa[v+YaaMYaNaSaUYave )

jaNa& ivjaNaSaihTa& YaJjaTva Maae+YaSae_éu>aaTa( )) 1 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
idaà tu te guhyatamaà
pravakñyämy anasüyave
jïänaà vijïäna-sahitaà
yaj jïätvä mokñyase ’çubhät

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; idam—this;
tu—but; te—unto you; guhya-tamam—the most confidential; pravakñyämi—I
am speaking; anasüyave—to the nonenvious; jïänam—knowledge;
vijïäna—realized knowledge; sahitam—with; yat—which; jïätvä—knowing;
mokñyase—you will be released; açubhät—from this miserable material
existence.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, because you are
never envious of Me, I shall impart to you this most confidential knowledge and
realization, knowing which you shall be relieved of the miseries of material
existence.

PURPORT

As  a  devotee  hears  more  and  more  about  the  Supreme  Lord,  he  becomes
enlightened. This hearing process is recommended in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam:
“The  messages  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  are  full  of  potencies,
and these potencies can be realized if topics regarding the Supreme Godhead

are discussed amongst devotees. This cannot be achieved by the association of
mental speculators or academic scholars, for it is realized knowledge.”

The  devotees  are  constantly  engaged  in  the  Supreme  Lord’s  service.  The
Lord understands the mentality and sincerity of a particular living entity who
is  engaged  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  gives  him  the  intelligence  to
understand the science of Kåñëa in the association of devotees. Discussion of
Kåñëa is very potent, and if a fortunate person has such association and tries to
assimilate  the  knowledge,  then  he  will  surely  make  advancement  toward
spiritual  realization.  Lord  Kåñëa,  in  order  to  encourage  Arjuna to higher and
higher elevation in His potent service, describes in this Ninth Chapter matters
more confidential than any He has already disclosed.

The very beginning of Bhagavad-gétä, the First Chapter, is more or less an
introduction  to  the  rest  of  the  book;  and  in  the  Second  and  Third  chapters,
the spiritual knowledge described is called confidential. Topics discussed in the
Seventh and Eighth chapters are specifically related to devotional service, and
because  they  bring  enlightenment  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  they  are  called
more confidential. But the matters which are described in the Ninth Chapter
deal  with  unalloyed,  pure  devotion.  Therefore  this  is  called  the  most
confidential. One who is situated in the most confidential knowledge of Kåñëa
is naturally transcendental; he therefore has no material pangs, although he is
in  the  material  world.  In  the  Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu  it  is  said  that  although
one who has a sincere desire to render loving service to the Supreme Lord is
situated  in  the  conditional  state  of  material  existence,  he  is  to  be  considered
liberated.  Similarly,  we  shall  find  in  the  Bhagavad-gétä,  Tenth  Chapter,  that
anyone who is engaged in that way is a liberated person.

Now this first verse has specific significance. The words idaà jïänam (“this
knowledge”) refer to pure devotional service, which consists of nine different
activities:  hearing,  chanting,  remembering,  serving,  worshiping,  praying,
obeying, maintaining friendship and surrendering everything. By the practice
of  these  nine  elements  of  devotional  service  one  is  elevated  to  spiritual
consciousness,  Kåñëa  consciousness.  When  one’s  heart  is  thus  cleared  of
material contamination, one can understand this science of Kåñëa. Simply to
understand  that  a  living  entity  is  not  material  is  not  sufficient.  That  may  be

the beginning of spiritual realization, but one should recognize the difference
between  activities  of  the  body  and  the  spiritual  activities  of  one  who
understands that he is not the body.

In the Seventh Chapter we have already discussed the opulent potency of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His different energies, the inferior and
superior natures, and all this material manifestation. Now in Chapter Nine the
glories of the Lord will be delineated.

The Sanskrit word anasüyave in this verse is also very significant. Generally
the commentators, even if they are highly scholarly, are all envious of Kåñëa,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even the most erudite scholars write on
Bhagavad-gétä  very  inaccurately.  Because  they  are  envious  of  Kåñëa,  their
commentaries are useless. The commentaries given by devotees of the Lord are
bona  fide.  No  one  can  explain  Bhagavad-gétä  or  give  perfect  knowledge  of
Kåñëa  if  he  is  envious.  One  who  criticizes  the  character  of  Kåñëa  without
knowing Him is a fool. So such commentaries should be very carefully avoided.
For one who understands that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the pure and transcendental Personality, these chapters will be very beneficial.

TEXT  2

raJaivÛa raJaGauù& Paiv}aiMadMautaMaMa( )

Pa[TYa+aavGaMa& DaMYa| SauSau%& k-TauRMaVYaYaMa( )) 2 ))

räja-vidyä räja-guhyaà
pavitram idam uttamam
pratyakñävagamaà dharmyaà
su-sukhaà kartum avyayam

SYNONYMS

räja-vidyä—the king of education; räja-guhyam—the king of confidential
knowledge; pavitram—the purest; idam—this; uttamam—transcendental;
pratyakña—by direct experience; avagamam—understood; dharmyam—the

principle of religion; su-sukham—very happy; kartum—to execute;
avyayam—everlasting.

TRANSLATION

This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all secrets. It is

the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct perception of the self by
realization, it is the perfection of religion. It is everlasting, and it is joyfully
performed.

PURPORT

This  chapter  of  Bhagavad-gétä  is  called  the  king  of  education  because  it  is
the  essence  of  all  doctrines  and  philosophies  explained  before.  Among  the
principal  philosophers  in  India  are  Gautama,  Kaëäda,  Kapila,  Yäjïavalkya,
Çäëòilya  and  Vaiçvänara.  And  finally  there  is  Vyäsadeva,  the  author  of  the
Vedänta-sütra. So there is no dearth of knowledge in the field of philosophy or
transcendental knowledge. Now the Lord says that this Ninth Chapter is the
king  of  all  such  knowledge,  the  essence  of  all  knowledge  that  can  be  derived
from  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  different  kinds  of  philosophy.  It  is  the  most
confidential  because  confidential  or  transcendental  knowledge  involves
understanding the difference between the soul and the body. And the king of
all confidential knowledge culminates in devotional service.

Generally, people are not educated in this confidential knowledge; they are
educated  in  external  knowledge.  As  far  as  ordinary  education  is  concerned,
people  are  involved  with  so  many  departments:  politics,  sociology,  physics,
chemistry,  mathematics,  astronomy,  engineering,  etc.  There  are  so  many
departments of knowledge all over the world and many huge universities, but
there  is,  unfortunately,  no  university  or  educational  institution  where  the
science of the spirit soul is instructed. Yet the soul is the most important part
of  the  body;  without  the  presence  of  the  soul,  the  body  has  no  value.  Still
people are placing great stress on the bodily necessities of life, not caring for
the vital soul.

The  Bhagavad-gétä,  especially  from  the  Second  Chapter  on,  stresses  the

importance of the soul. In the very beginning, the Lord says that this body is
perishable and that the soul is not perishable (antavanta ime dehä nityasyoktäù
çarériëaù).  That  is  a  confidential  part  of  knowledge: simply knowing that the
spirit  soul  is  different  from  this  body  and  that  its  nature  is  immutable,
indestructible  and  eternal.  But  that  gives  no  positive  information  about  the
soul. Sometimes people are under the impression that the soul is different from
the body and that when the body is finished, or one is liberated from the body,
the soul remains in a void and becomes impersonal. But actually that is not the
fact.  How  can  the  soul,  which  is  so  active  within  this  body,  be  inactive  after
being  liberated  from  the  body?  It  is  always  active.  If  it  is  eternal,  then  it  is
eternally  active,  and  its  activities  in  the  spiritual  kingdom  are  the  most
confidential part of spiritual knowledge. These activities of the spirit soul are
therefore  indicated  here  as  constituting  the  king  of  all  knowledge,  the  most
confidential part of all knowledge.

This  knowledge  is  the  purest  form  of  all  activities,  as  explained  in  Vedic
literature. In the Padma Puräëa, man’s sinful activities have been analyzed and
are shown to be the results of sin after sin. Those who are engaged in fruitive
activities  are  entangled  in  different  stages  and  forms  of  sinful  reactions.  For
instance, when the seed of a particular tree is sown, the tree does not appear
immediately to grow; it takes some time. It is first a small, sprouting plant, then
it  assumes  the  form  of  a  tree,  then  it  flowers  and  bears  fruit,  and,  when  it  is
complete,  the  flowers  and  fruits  are  enjoyed  by  persons  who  have  sown  the
seed of the tree. Similarly, a man performs a sinful act, and like a seed it takes
time to fructify. There are different stages. The sinful action may have already
stopped within the individual, but the results or the fruit of that sinful action
are still to be enjoyed. There are sins which are still in the form of a seed, and
there are others which are already fructified and are giving us fruit, which we
are enjoying as distress and pain.

As explained in the twenty-eighth verse of the Seventh Chapter, a person
who has completely ended the reactions of all sinful activities and who is fully
engaged in pious activities, being freed from the duality of this material world,
becomes  engaged  in  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  Kåñëa.  In  other  words,  those  who  are  actually  engaged  in  the

devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord  are  already  freed  from  all  reactions.
This statement is confirmed in the Padma Puräëa:

aprärabdha-phalaà päpaà
küöaà béjaà phalonmukham
krameëaiva praléyeta
viñëu-bhakti-ratätmanäm

For  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, all sinful reactions, whether fructified, in the stock, or
in  the  form  of  a  seed,  gradually  vanish.  Therefore  the  purifying  potency  of
devotional service is very strong, and it is called pavitram uttamam, the purest.
Uttama means transcendental. Tamas means this material world or darkness,
and  uttama  means  that  which  is  transcendental  to  material  activities.
Devotional activities are never to be considered material, although sometimes
it appears that devotees are engaged just like ordinary men. One who can see
and  is  familiar  with  devotional  service  will  know  that  they  are  not  material
activities.  They  are  all  spiritual  and  devotional,  uncontaminated  by  the
material modes of nature.

It is said that the execution of devotional service is so perfect that one can
perceive  the  results  directly.  This  direct  result  is  actually  perceived,  and  we
have practical experience that any person who is chanting the holy names of
Kåñëa  (Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare
Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare  Hare)  in  course  of  chanting  without  offenses  feels
some transcendental pleasure and very quickly becomes purified of all material
contamination. This is actually seen. Furthermore, if one engages not only in
hearing but in trying to broadcast the message of devotional activities as well,
or  if  he  engages  himself  in  helping  the  missionary  activities  of  Kåñëa
consciousness,  he  gradually  feels  spiritual  progress.  This  advancement  in
spiritual  life  does  not  depend  on  any  kind  of  previous  education  or
qualification.  The  method  itself  is  so  pure  that  by  simply  engaging  in  it  one
becomes pure.

In  the Vedänta-sütra  (3.2.26)  this  is  also  described  in  the  following  words:
prakäçaç ca karmaëy abhyäsät. “Devotional service is so potent that simply by

engaging  in  the  activities  of  devotional  service  one  becomes  enlightened
without a doubt.” A practical example of this can be seen in the previous life
of Närada, who in that life happened to be the son of a maidservant. He had
no  education,  nor  was  he  born  into  a  high  family.  But  when  his  mother  was
engaged  in  serving  great  devotees,  Närada  also  became  engaged,  and
sometimes,  in  the  absence  of  his  mother,  he  would  serve  the  great  devotees
himself. Närada personally says,

ucchiñöa-lepän anumodito dvijaiù
sakåt sma bhuïje tad-apästa-kilbiñaù
evaà pravåttasya viçuddha-cetasas
tad-dharma evätma-ruciù prajäyate

In this verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.25) Närada describes his previous
life to his disciple Vyäsadeva. He says that while engaged as a boy servant for
those purified devotees during the four months of their stay, he was intimately
associating  with  them.  Sometimes  those  sages  left  remnants  of  food  on  their
dishes,  and  the  boy,  who  would  wash  their  dishes,  wanted  to  taste  the
remnants. So he asked the great devotees for their permission, and when they
gave  it  Närada  ate  those  remnants  and  consequently  became  freed  from  all
sinful reactions. As he went on eating, he gradually became as pure-hearted as
the sages. The great devotees relished the taste of unceasing devotional service
to  the  Lord  by  hearing  and  chanting,  and  Närada  gradually  developed  the
same taste. Närada says further,

tatränvahaà kåñëa-kathäù pragäyatäm
anugraheëäçåëavaà manoharäù
täù çraddhayä me ’nupadaà viçåëvataù
priyaçravasy aìga mamäbhavad ruciù

By associating with the sages, Närada got the taste for hearing and chanting
the glories of the Lord, and he developed a great desire for devotional service.
Therefore, as described in the Vedänta-sütra, prakäçaç ca karmaëy abhyäsät: if
one is engaged simply in the acts of devotional service, everything is revealed
to him automatically, and he can understand. This is called pratyakña, directly

perceived.

The  word  dharmyam  means  “the  path  of  religion.”  Närada  was  actually  a
son  of  a  maidservant.  He  had  no  opportunity  to  go  to  school.  He  was  simply
assisting his mother, and fortunately his mother rendered some service to the
devotees. The child Närada also got the opportunity and simply by association
achieved  the  highest  goal  of  all  religion.  The  highest  goal  of  all  religion  is
devotional  service,  as  stated  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (sa  vai  puàsäà  paro
dharmo  yato  bhaktir  adhokñaje).  Religious  people  generally  do  not  know  that
the  highest  perfection  of  religion  is  the  attainment  of  devotional  service.  As
we have already discussed in regard to the last verse of Chapter Eight (vedeñu
for
yajïeñu 
self-realization.  But  here,  although  Närada  never  went  to  the  school  of  the
spiritual master and was not educated in the Vedic principles, he acquired the
highest  results  of  Vedic  study.  This  process  is  so  potent  that  even  without
performing  the  religious  process  regularly,  one  can  be  raised  to  the  highest
perfection.  How  is  this  possible?  This  is  also  confirmed  in  Vedic  literature:
äcäryavän puruño veda. One who is in association with great äcäryas, even if he
is  not  educated  or  has  never  studied  the  Vedas,  can  become  familiar  with  all
the knowledge necessary for realization.

tapaùsu  caiva),  generally  Vedic  knowledge 

is  required 

The  process  of  devotional  service  is  a  very  happy  one  (susukham).  Why?
Devotional service consists of çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], so one can
simply hear the chanting of the glories of the Lord or can attend philosophical
lectures  on  transcendental knowledge given by authorized äcäryas. Simply by
sitting,  one  can  learn;  then  one  can  eat  the  remnants  of  the  food  offered  to
God, nice palatable dishes. In every state devotional service is joyful. One can
execute  devotional  service  even  in  the  most  poverty-stricken  condition.  The
Lord  says,  patraà  puñpaà  phalaà  toyam:  He  is  ready  to  accept  from  the
devotee any kind of offering, never mind what. Even a leaf, a flower, a bit of
fruit, or a little water, which are all available in every part of the world, can be
offered  by  any  person,  regardless  of  social  position,  and  will  be  accepted  if
offered with love. There are many instances in history. Simply by tasting the
tulasé leaves offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, great sages like Sanat-kumära
became  great  devotees.  Therefore  the  devotional  process  is  very  nice,  and  it

can be executed in a happy mood. God accepts only the love with which things
are offered to Him.

It  is  said  here  that  this  devotional  service is eternally existing. It is not as
the  Mäyävädé  philosophers  claim.  Although  they  sometimes  take  to  so-called
devotional service, their idea is that as long as they are not liberated they will
continue their devotional service, but at the end, when they become liberated,
they  will  “become  one  with  God.”  Such  temporary  time-serving  devotional
service  is  not  accepted  as  pure  devotional  service.  Actual  devotional  service
continues even after liberation. When the devotee goes to the spiritual planet
in the kingdom of God, he is also engaged there in serving the Supreme Lord.
He does not try to become one with the Supreme Lord.

As  will  be  seen  in  Bhagavad-gétä,  actual  devotional  service  begins  after
liberation.  After  one  is  liberated,  when  one  is  situated  in  the  Brahman
position  (brahma-bhüta),  one’s  devotional  service  begins  (samaù  sarveñu
bhüteñu  mad-bhaktià  labhate  paräm).  No  one  can  understand  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead by executing karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga, añöäìga-yoga or
any  other  yoga  independently.  By  these  yogic  methods  one  may  make  a  little
progress  toward  bhakti-yoga,  but  without  coming  to  the  stage  of  devotional
service  one  cannot  understand  what  is  the  Personality  of  Godhead.  In  the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  it  is  also  confirmed  that  when  one  becomes  purified  by
executing 
service,  especially  by  hearing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  or  Bhagavad-gétä  from  realized  souls,  then  he  can
understand 
science  of  God.  Evaà
prasanna-manaso  bhagavad-bhakti  yogataù.  When  one’s  heart  is  cleared  of  all
nonsense,  then  one  can  understand  what  God  is.  Thus  the  process  of
devotional service, of Kåñëa consciousness, is the king of all education and the
king of all confidential knowledge. It is the purest form of religion, and it can
be executed joyfully without difficulty. Therefore one should adopt it.

the  process  of  devotional 

science  of  Kåñëa,  or 

the 

the 

TEXT  3

Aé[ÕDaaNaa" Pauåza DaMaRSYaaSYa ParNTaPa )

APa[aPYa Maa& iNavTaRNTae Ma*TYauSa&SaarvTMaRiNa )) 3 ))

açraddadhänäù puruñä
dharmasyäsya parantapa
apräpya mäà nivartante
måtyu-saàsära-vartmani

SYNONYMS

açraddadhänäù—those who are faithless; puruñäù—such persons;
dharmasya—toward the process of religion; asya—this; parantapa—O killer of
the enemies; apräpya—without obtaining; mäm—Me; nivartante—come back;
måtyu—of death; saàsära—in material existence; vartmani—on the path.

TRANSLATION

Those who are not faithful in this devotional service cannot attain Me, O
conqueror of enemies. Therefore they return to the path of birth and death in
this material world.

PURPORT

The  faithless  cannot  accomplish  this  process  of  devotional  service;  that  is
the  purport  of  this  verse.  Faith  is  created  by  association  with  devotees.
Unfortunate  people,  even  after  hearing  all  the  evidence  of  Vedic  literature
from  great  personalities,  still  have  no  faith  in  God.  They  are  hesitant  and
cannot  stay  fixed  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord.  Thus  faith  is  a  most
the
important 
Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that faith is the complete conviction that simply
by serving the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, one can achieve all perfection. That is
called real faith. As stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (4.31.14),

consciousness. 

for  progress 

in  Kåñëa 

factor 

In 

yathä taror müla-niñecanena
tåpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaçäkhäù
präëopahäräc ca yathendriyäëäà

tathaiva sarvärhaëam acyutejyä

“By  giving  water  to  the  root  of  a  tree  one  satisfies  its  branches,  twigs  and
leaves, and by supplying food to the stomach one satisfies all the senses of the
body. Similarly, by engaging in the transcendental service of the Supreme Lord
one  automatically  satisfies  all  the  demigods  and  all  other  living  entities.”
Therefore,  after  reading  Bhagavad-gétä  one  should  promptly  come  to  the
conclusion  of  Bhagavad-gétä:  one  should  give  up  all  other  engagements  and
adopt the service of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. If
one is convinced of this philosophy of life, that is faith.

Now,  the  development  of  that  faith  is  the  process  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.
There are three divisions of Kåñëa conscious men. In the third class are those
who  have  no  faith.  Even  if  they  are  officially  engaged  in  devotional  service,
they  cannot  achieve  the  highest  perfectional  stage.  Most  probably  they  will
slip,  after  some  time.  They  may  become  engaged,  but  because  they  haven’t
complete  conviction  and  faith,  it  is  very  difficult  for  them  to  continue  in
Kåñëa  consciousness.  We  have  practical  experience  in  discharging  our
missionary  activity  that  some  people  come  and  apply  themselves  to  Kåñëa
consciousness with some hidden motive, and as soon as they are economically a
little well situated they give up this process and take to their old ways again. It
is  only  by  faith  that  one  can  advance  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  As  far  as  the
development of faith is concerned, one who is well versed in the literatures of
devotional service and has attained the stage of firm faith is called a first-class
person in Kåñëa consciousness. And in the second class are those who are not
in  understanding  the  devotional  scriptures  but  who
very  advanced 
automatically have firm faith that kåñëa-bhakti, or service to Kåñëa, is the best
course  and  so  in  good  faith  have  taken  it  up.  Thus  they  are  superior  to  the
third  class,  who  have  neither  perfect  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  nor  good
faith  but  by  association  and  simplicity  are  trying  to  follow.  The  third-class
person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  may  fall  down,  but  when  one  is  in  the  second
class  he  does  not  fall  down,  and  for  the  first-class  person  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  there  is  no  chance  of  falling  down.  One  in  the  first  class  will
surely make progress and achieve the result at the end. As far as the third-class
person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  concerned,  although  he  has  faith  in  the

conviction that devotional service to Kåñëa is very good, he has not yet gained
adequate  knowledge  of  Kåñëa  through  the  scriptures  like  Çrémad-Bhägavatam
and Bhagavad-gétä. Sometimes these third-class persons in Kåñëa consciousness
have  some  tendency  toward  karma-yoga  and  jïäna-yoga,  and  sometimes  they
are  disturbed,  but  as  soon  as  the  infection  of  karma-yoga  or  jïäna-yoga  is
in  Kåñëa
vanquished,  they  become  second-class  or  first-class  persons 
consciousness. Faith in Kåñëa is also divided into three stages and described in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.  First-class  attachment,  second-class  attachment  and
third-class  attachment  are  also  explained  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  in  the
Eleventh Canto. Those who have no faith even after hearing about Kåñëa and
the  excellence  of  devotional  service,  who  think  that  it  is  simply  eulogy,  find
the  path  very  difficult,  even  if  they  are  supposedly  engaged  in  devotional
service. For them there is very little hope of gaining perfection. Thus faith is
very important in the discharge of devotional service.

TEXT  4

MaYaa TaTaiMad& Sav| JaGadVYa¢-MaUiTaRNaa )

MaTSQaaiNa SavR>aUTaaiNa Na cah& TaeZvviSQaTa" )) 4 ))

mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù

SYNONYMS

mayä—by Me; tatam—pervaded; idam—this; sarvam—all; jagat—cosmic
manifestation; avyakta-mürtinä—by the unmanifested form; mat-sthäni—in
Me; sarva-bhütäni—all living entities; na—not; ca—also; aham—I; teñu—in
them; avasthitaù—situated.

TRANSLATION

By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All

beings are in Me, but I am not in them.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross

material senses. It is said,

ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.234)

Lord  Çré  Kåñëa’s  name,  fame,  pastimes,  etc.,  cannot  be  understood  by
material senses. Only to one who is engaged in pure devotional service under
proper  guidance  is  He  revealed.  In  the  Brahma-saàhitä  (5.38)  it  is  stated,
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti: one
can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always within himself
and  outside  himself  if  one  has  developed  the  transcendental  loving  attitude
towards Him. Thus for people in general He is not visible. Here it is said that
although He is all-pervading, everywhere present, He is not conceivable by the
material  senses.  This  is  indicated  here  by  the  word  avyakta-mürtinä.  But
actually,  although  we  cannot  see  Him,  everything  is  resting  in  Him.  As  we
have  discussed 
in  the  Seventh  Chapter,  the  entire  material  cosmic
manifestation  is  only  a  combination  of  His  two  different  energies—the
superior, spiritual energy and the inferior, material energy. Just as the sunshine
is  spread  all  over  the  universe,  the  energy  of  the  Lord  is  spread  all  over  the
creation, and everything is resting in that energy.

Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has lost
His  personal  existence.  To  refute  such  an  argument  the  Lord  says,  “I  am
everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof.” For example, a king
heads  a  government  which  is  but  the  manifestation  of  the  king’s  energy;  the
different governmental departments are nothing but the energies of the king,

and  each  department  is  resting  on  the  king’s  power.  But  still  one  cannot
expect the king to be present in every department personally. That is a crude
example.  Similarly,  all  the  manifestations  that  we  see  and  everything  that
exists, both in this material world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the
energy  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  The  creation  takes  place  by
the  diffusion  of  His  different  energies,  and,  as  stated  in  the  Bhagavad-gétä,
viñöabhyäham  idaà  kåtsnam:  He  is  everywhere  present  by  His  personal
representation, the diffusion of His different energies.

TEXT  5

Na c MaTSQaaiNa >aUTaaiNa PaXYa Mae YaaeGaMaEìrMa( )

>aUTa>a*à c >aUTaSQaae MaMaaTMaa >aUTa>aavNa" )) 5 ))

na ca mat-sthäni bhütäni
paçya me yogam aiçvaram
bhüta-bhån na ca bhüta-stho
mamätmä bhüta-bhävanaù

SYNONYMS

na—never; ca—also; mat-sthäni—situated in Me; bhütäni—all creation;
paçya—just see; me—My; yogam aiçvaram—inconceivable mystic power;
bhüta-bhåt—the maintainer of all living entities; na—never; ca—also;
bhüta-sthaù—in the cosmic manifestation; mama—My; ätmä—Self;
bhüta-bhävanaù—the source of all manifestations.

TRANSLATION

And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic
opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities and although I am
everywhere, I am not a part of this cosmic manifestation, for My Self is the
very source of creation.

PURPORT

The Lord says that everything is resting on Him (mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni).
This should not be misunderstood. The Lord is not directly concerned with the
maintenance and sustenance of this material manifestation. Sometimes we see
a picture of Atlas holding the globe on his shoulders; he seems to be very tired,
holding this great earthly planet. Such an image should not be entertained in
connection  with  Kåñëa’s  upholding  this  created  universe.  He  says  that
although everything is resting on Him, He is aloof. The planetary systems are
floating in space, and this space is the energy of the Supreme Lord. But He is
different  from  space.  He  is  differently  situated.  Therefore  the  Lord  says,
“Although  they  are  situated  on  My  inconceivable  energy,  as  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  I  am  aloof  from  them.”  This  is  the  inconceivable
opulence of the Lord.

is  performing 

In the Nirukti Vedic dictionary it is said, yujyate ’nena durghaöeñu käryeñu:
inconceivably  wonderful  pastimes,
“The  Supreme  Lord 
displaying His energy.” His person is full of different potent energies, and His
determination is itself actual fact. In this way the Personality of Godhead is to
be  understood.  We  may  think  of  doing  something,  but  there  are  so  many
impediments, and sometimes it is not possible to do as we like. But when Kåñëa
wants  to  do  something,  simply  by  His  willing,  everything  is  performed  so
perfectly that one cannot imagine how it is being done. The Lord explains this
fact:  although  He  is  the  maintainer  and  sustainer  of  the  entire  material
manifestation,  He  does  not  touch  this  material  manifestation.  Simply  by  His
supreme  will,  everything  is  created,  everything  is  sustained,  everything  is
maintained, and everything is annihilated. There is no difference between His
mind and Himself (as there is a difference between ourselves and our present
material  mind)  because  He  is  absolute  spirit.  Simultaneously  the  Lord  is
present in everything; yet the common man cannot understand how He is also
present  personally.  He  is  different  from  this  material  manifestation,  yet
everything  is  resting  on  Him.  This  is  explained  here  as  yogam  aiçvaram,  the
mystic power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  6

YaQaak-aXaiSQaTaae iNaTYa& vaYau" SavR}aGaae MahaNa( )

TaQaa SavaRi<a >aUTaaiNa MaTSQaaNaqTYauPaDaarYa )) 6 ))

yathäkäça-sthito nityaà
väyuù sarvatra-go mahän
tathä sarväëi bhütäni
mat-sthänéty upadhäraya

SYNONYMS

yathä—just as; äkäça-sthitaù—situated in the sky; nityam—always; väyuù—the
wind; sarvatra-gaù—blowing everywhere; mahän—great; tathä—similarly;
sarväëi bhütäni—all created beings; mat-sthäni—situated in Me; iti—thus;
upadhäraya—try to understand.

TRANSLATION

Understand that as the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, rests always in

the sky, all created beings rest in Me.

PURPORT

For  the  ordinary  person  it  is  almost  inconceivable  how  the  huge  material
creation is resting in Him. But the Lord is giving an example which may help
us to understand. The sky may be the biggest manifestation we can conceive.
And  in  that  sky  the  wind  or  air  is  the  biggest  manifestation  in  the  cosmic
world. The movement of the air influences the movements of everything. But
although  the  wind  is  great,  it  is  still  situated  within  the  sky;  the  wind  is  not
beyond the sky. Similarly, all the wonderful cosmic manifestations are existing
by  the  supreme  will  of  God,  and  all  of  them  are  subordinate  to  that  supreme
will.  As  we  generally  say,  not  a  blade  of  grass  moves  without  the  will  of  the

Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Thus  everything  is  moving  under  His  will:
by  His  will  everything  is  being  created,  everything  is  being  maintained,  and
everything is being annihilated. Still He is aloof from everything, as the sky is
always aloof from the activities of the wind.

In the Upaniñads it is stated, yad-bhéñä vätaù pavate: “It is out of the fear of
the Supreme Lord that the wind is blowing.” (Taittiréya Upaniñad 2.8.1) In the
Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad (3.8.9) it is stated, etasya vä akñarasya praçäsane gärgi
sürya-candramasau  vidhåtau  tiñöhata  etasya  vä  akñarasya  praçäsane  gärgi
dyäv-äpåthivyau  vidhåtau  tiñöhataù.  “By  the  supreme  order,  under  the
superintendence  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the  moon,  the  sun,
and the other great planets are moving.” In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.52) also it is
stated,

yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù
yasyäjïayä bhramati sambhåta-käla-cakro
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi

This is a description of the movement of the sun. It is said that the sun is
considered to be one of the eyes of the Supreme Lord and that it has immense
potency to diffuse heat and light. Still it is moving in its prescribed orbit by the
order and the supreme will of Govinda. So, from the Vedic literature we can
find evidence that this material manifestation, which appears to us to be very
wonderful and great, is under the complete control of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This will be further explained in the later verses of this chapter.

TEXT  7

SavR>aUTaaiNa k-aENTaeYa Pa[k*-iTa& YaaiNTa MaaiMak-aMa( )

k-LPa+aYae PauNaSTaaiNa k-LPaadaE ivSa*JaaMYahMa( )) 7 ))

sarva-bhütäni kaunteya
prakåtià yänti mämikäm
kalpa-kñaye punas täni

kalpädau visåjämy aham

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhütäni—all created entities; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
prakåtim—nature; yänti—enter; mämikäm—My; kalpa-kñaye—at the end of
the millennium; punaù—again; täni—all those; kalpa-ädau—in the beginning
of the millennium; visåjämi—create; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunté, at the end of the millennium all material manifestations

enter into My nature, and at the beginning of another millennium, by My
potency, I create them again.

PURPORT

The  creation,  maintenance  and  annihilation  of  this  material  cosmic
manifestation are completely dependent on the supreme will of the Personality
of  Godhead.  “At  the  end  of  the  millennium”  means  at  the  death  of  Brahmä.
Brahmä  lives  for  one  hundred  years,  and  his  one  day  is  calculated  at
4,300,000,000  of  our  earthly  years.  His  night  is  of  the  same  duration.  His
month consists of thirty such days and nights, and his year of twelve months.
After  one  hundred  such  years,  when  Brahmä  dies,  the  devastation  or
annihilation  takes  place;  this  means  that  the  energy  manifested  by  the
Supreme Lord is again wound up in Himself. Then again, when there is a need
to manifest the cosmic world, it is done by His will. Bahu syäm: “Although I am
one,  I  shall  become  many.”  This  is the Vedic aphorism (Chändogya Upaniñad
6.2.3).  He  expands  Himself  in  this  material  energy,  and  the  whole  cosmic
manifestation again takes place.

TEXT  8

Pa[k*-iTa& SvaMaví>Ya ivSa*JaaiMa PauNa" PauNa" )

>aUTaGa]aMaiMaMa& k*-TòMavXa& Pa[k*-TaevRXaaTa( )) 8 ))

prakåtià sväm avañöabhya
visåjämi punaù punaù
bhüta-grämam imaà kåtsnam
avaçaà prakåter vaçät

SYNONYMS

prakåtim—the material nature; sväm—of My personal Self;
avañöabhya—entering into; visåjämi—I create; punaù punaù—again and again;
bhüta-grämam—all the cosmic manifestations; imam—these; kåtsnam—in
total; avaçam—automatically; prakåteù—of the force of nature; vaçät—under
obligation.

TRANSLATION

The whole cosmic order is under Me. Under My will it is automatically
manifested again and again, and under My will it is annihilated at the end.

PURPORT

This  material  world  is  the  manifestation  of  the  inferior  energy  of  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  This  has  already  been  explained  several
times. At the creation, the material energy is let loose as the mahat-tattva, into
which  the  Lord  as  His  first  Puruña  incarnation,  Mahä-Viñëu,  enters.  He  lies
within  the  Causal  Ocean  and  breathes  out  innumerable  universes,  and  into
each universe the Lord again enters as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. Each universe is
in that way created. He still further manifests Himself as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu,
and that Viñëu enters into everything—even into the minute atom. This fact
is explained here. He enters into everything.

Now, as far as the living entities are concerned, they are impregnated into
this  material  nature,  and  as  a  result  of  their  past  deeds  they  take  different
positions. Thus the activities of this material world begin. The activities of the

different  species  of  living  beings  are  begun  from  the  very  moment  of  the
creation. It is not that all is evolved. The different species of life are created
immediately along with the universe. Men, animals, beasts, birds—everything
is  simultaneously  created,  because  whatever  desires  the  living  entities  had  at
the  last  annihilation  are  again  manifested.  It  is  clearly  indicated  here  by  the
word avaçam that the living entities have nothing to do with this process. The
state of being in their past life in the past creation is simply manifested again,
and all this is done simply by His will. This is the inconceivable potency of the
Supreme  Personality  of  God.  And  after  creating  different  species  of  life,  He
has  no  connection  with  them.  The  creation  takes  place  to  accommodate  the
inclinations  of  the  various  living  entities,  and  so  the  Lord  does  not  become
involved with it.

TEXT  9

Na c Maa& TaaiNa k-MaaRi<a iNabDNaiNTa DaNaÅYa )

odaSaqNavdaSaqNaMaSa¢&- Taezu k-MaRSau )) 9 ))

na ca mäà täni karmäëi
nibadhnanti dhanaïjaya
udäséna-vad äsénam
asaktaà teñu karmasu

SYNONYMS

na—never; ca—also; mäm—Me; täni—all those; karmäëi—activities;
nibadhnanti—bind; dhanaïjaya—O conqueror of riches; udäséna-vat—as
neutral; äsénam—situated; asaktam—without attraction; teñu—for those;
karmasu—activities.

TRANSLATION

O Dhanaïjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached from all

these material activities, seated as though neutral.

PURPORT

One should not think, in this connection, that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead  has  no  engagement.  In  His  spiritual world He is always engaged. In
the  Brahma-saàhitä  (5.6)  it  is  stated,  ätmärämasya  tasyästi  prakåtyä  na
samägamaù: “He is always involved in His eternal, blissful, spiritual activities,
but He has nothing to do with these material activities.” Material activities are
being carried on by His different potencies. The Lord is always neutral in the
material activities of the created world. This neutrality is mentioned here with
the  word  udäséna-vat.  Although  He  has  control  over  every  minute  detail  of
material  activities,  He  is  sitting  as  if  neutral.  The  example  can  be  given  of  a
high-court  judge  sitting  on  his  bench.  By  his  order  so  many  things  are
happening—someone is being hanged, someone is being put into jail, someone
is awarded a huge amount of wealth—but still he is neutral. He has nothing to
do  with  all  that  gain  and  loss.  Similarly,  the  Lord  is  always  neutral,  although
He has His hand in every sphere of activity. In the Vedänta-sütra (2.1.34) it is
stated,  vaiñamya-nairghåëye  na:  He  is  not  situated  in  the  dualities  of  this
material world. He is transcendental to these dualities. Nor is He attached to
the  creation  and  annihilation  of  this  material  world.  The  living  entities  take
their different forms in the various species of life according to their past deeds,
and the Lord doesn’t interfere with them.

TEXT  10

MaYaaDYa+ae<a Pa[k*-iTa" SaUYaTae SacracrMa( )

heTauNaaNaeNa k-aENTaeYa JaGaiÜPairvTaRTae )) 10 ))

mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate

SYNONYMS

mayä—by Me; adhyakñeëa—by superintendence; prakåtiù—material nature;
süyate—manifests; sa—both; cara-acaram—the moving and the nonmoving;
hetunä—for the reason; anena—this; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; jagat—the
cosmic manifestation; viparivartate—is working.

TRANSLATION

This material nature, which is one of My energies, is working under My
direction, O son of Kunté, producing all moving and nonmoving beings. Under
its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord, although aloof from all the
activities  of  the  material  world,  remains  the  supreme  director.  The  Supreme
Lord  is  the  supreme  will  and  the  background  of  this  material  manifestation,
but the management is being conducted by material nature. Kåñëa also states
in Bhagavad-gétä that of all of the living entities in different forms and species,
“I  am  the  father.”  The  father  gives  seeds  to  the  womb  of  the  mother  for  the
child, and similarly the Supreme Lord by His mere glance injects all the living
entities into the womb of material nature, and they come out in their different
forms and species, according to their last desires and activities. All these living
entities,  although  born  under  the  glance  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  take  their
different  bodies  according  to  their  past  deeds  and  desires.  So  the  Lord  is  not
directly  attached  to  this  material  creation.  He  simply  glances  over  material
is  created
nature;  material  nature 
immediately.  Because  He  glances  over  material  nature,  there  is  undoubtedly
activity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but He has nothing to do with the
manifestation  of  the  material  world  directly.  This  example  is  given  in  the
småti: when there is a fragrant flower before someone, the fragrance is touched
by  the  smelling  power  of  the  person,  yet  the  smelling  and  the  flower  are

is  thus  activated,  and  everything 

detached  from  one  another.  There  is  a  similar  connection  between  the
material  world  and  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead;  actually  He  has
nothing  to  do  with  this  material  world,  but  He  creates  by  His  glance  and
ordains.  In  summary,  material  nature,  without  the  superintendence  of  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  cannot  do  anything.  Yet  the  Supreme
Personality is detached from all material activities.

TEXT  11

AvJaaNaiNTa Maa& MaU!a MaaNauzq& TaNauMaaié[TaMa( )

Par& >aavMaJaaNaNTaae MaMa >aUTaMaheìrMa( )) 11 ))

avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram

SYNONYMS

avajänanti—deride; mäm—Me; müòhäù—foolish men; mänuñém—in a human
form; tanum—a body; äçritam—assuming; param—transcendental;
bhävam—nature; ajänantaù—not knowing; mama—My; bhüta—of everything
that be; mahä-éçvaram—the supreme proprietor.

TRANSLATION

Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My

transcendental nature as the Supreme Lord of all that be.

PURPORT

From  the  other  explanations  of  the  previous  verses  in  this  chapter,  it  is
clear  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  although  appearing  like  a
human  being,  is  not  a  common  man.  The  Personality  of  Godhead,  who

conducts the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the complete cosmic
manifestation, cannot be a human being. Yet there are many foolish men who
consider Kåñëa to be merely a powerful man and nothing more. Actually, He is
the  original  Supreme  Personality,  as  is  confirmed  in  the  Brahma-saàhitä
(éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù); He is the Supreme Lord.

There are many éçvaras, controllers, and one appears greater than another.
In  the  ordinary  management  of  affairs  in  the  material  world,  we  find  some
official  or  director,  and  above  him  there  is  a  secretary,  and  above  him  a
minister,  and  above  him  a  president.  Each  of  them  is  a  controller,  but  one  is
controlled  by  another.  In  the  Brahma-saàhitä  it  is  said  that  Kåñëa  is  the
supreme  controller;  there  are  many  controllers  undoubtedly,  both  in  the
material  and  spiritual  world,  but  Kåñëa  is  the  supreme  controller  (éçvaraù
paramaù kåñëaù). and His body is sac-cid-änanda, nonmaterial.

just 

like  an  ordinary  man,  but  actually  His  body 

Material  bodies  cannot  perform  the  wonderful  acts  described  in  previous
verses. His body is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge. Although He is not a
common man, the foolish deride Him and consider Him to be a man. His body
is  called  here  mänuñém  because  He  is  acting  just  like  a  man,  a  friend  of
Arjuna’s, a politician involved in the Battle of Kurukñetra. In so many ways He
is
is  acting 
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]—eternal bliss and knowledge absolute. This is
confirmed in the Vedic language also. Sac-cid-änanda-rüpäya kåñëäya: “I offer
my  obeisances  unto  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  who  is  the
eternal  blissful  form  of  knowledge.”  (Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad  1.1)  There  are
other  descriptions  in  the  Vedic  language  also.  Tam ekaà govindam: “You are
Govinda,  the  pleasure  of  the  senses  and  the  cows.”  Sac-cid-änanda-vigraham:
“And  Your  form  is  transcendental,  full  of  knowledge,  bliss  and  eternality.”
(Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad 1.35)

Despite the transcendental qualities of Lord Kåñëa’s body, its full bliss and
knowledge,  there  are  many  so-called  scholars  and  commentators  of
Bhagavad-gétä who deride Kåñëa as an ordinary man. The scholar may be born
an extraordinary man due to his previous good work, but this conception of Çré
Kåñëa  is  due  to  a  poor  fund  of  knowledge.  Therefore  he  is  called  müòha.  for
only  foolish  persons  consider  Kåñëa  to  be  an  ordinary  human  being.  The

foolish consider Kåñëa an ordinary human being because they do not know the
confidential  activities  of  the  Supreme  Lord  and  His  different  energies.  They
do  not  know  that  Kåñëa’s  body  is  a  symbol  of  complete  knowledge  and  bliss,
that  He  is  the  proprietor  of  everything  that  be  and  that  He  can  award
liberation  to  anyone.  Because  they  do  not  know  that  Kåñëa  has  so  many
transcendental qualifications, they deride Him.

Nor  do  they  know  that  the  appearance  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead in this material world is a manifestation of His internal energy. He is
the  master  of  the  material  energy.  As  has  been  explained  in  several  places
(mama  mäyä  duratyayä),  He  claims  that  the  material  energy,  although  very
powerful, is under His control, and whoever surrenders unto Him can get out
of  the  control  of  this  material  energy.  If  a  soul  surrendered  to  Kåñëa  can  get
out of the influence of material energy, then how can the Supreme Lord, who
conducts  the  creation,  maintenance  and  annihilation  of  the  whole  cosmic
nature, have a material body like us? So this conception of Kåñëa is complete
foolishness. Foolish persons, however, cannot conceive that the Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, appearing just like an ordinary man, can be the controller of
all  the  atoms  and  of  the  gigantic  manifestation  of  the  universal  form.  The
biggest and the minutest are beyond their conception, so they cannot imagine
that a form like that of a human being can simultaneously control the infinite
and  the  minute.  Actually  although  He  is  controlling  the  infinite  and  the
finite,  He  is  apart  from  all  this  manifestation.  It  is  clearly  stated  concerning
His  yogam  aiçvaram,  His  inconceivable  transcendental  energy,  that  He  can
control  the  infinite  and  the  finite  simultaneously  and  that  He  can  remain
aloof  from  them.  Although  the  foolish  cannot  imagine  how  Kåñëa,  who
appears just like a human being, can control the infinite and the finite, those
who  are  pure  devotees  accept  this,  for  they  know  that  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  Therefore  they  completely  surrender  unto  Him  and
engage in Kåñëa consciousness, devotional service of the Lord.

There  are  many  controversies  between  the  impersonalists  and  the
personalists about the Lord’s appearance as a human being. But if we consult
Bhagavad-gétä 
for
understanding the science of Kåñëa, then we can understand that Kåñëa is the

and  Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 

authoritative 

texts 

the 

Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  He  is  not  an  ordinary  man,  although  He
appeared on this earth as an ordinary human. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, First
Canto,  First  Chapter,  when  the  sages  headed  by  Çaunaka  inquired  about  the
activities of Kåñëa, they said:

kåtavän kila karmäëi
saha rämeëa keçavaù
ati-martyäni bhagavän
güòhaù kapaöa-mäëuñaù

“Lord  Çré  Kåñëa,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  along  with
Balaräma,  played  like  a  human  being,  and  so  masked  He  performed  many
superhuman acts.” (Bhäg. 1.1.20) The Lord’s appearance as a man bewilders the
foolish.  No  human  being  could  perform  the  wonderful  acts  that  Kåñëa
performed  while  He  was  present  on  this  earth.  When  Kåñëa  appeared  before
His  father  and  mother,  Vasudeva  and  Devaké,  He  appeared  with  four  hands,
but after the prayers of the parents He transformed Himself into an ordinary
child.  As  stated  in  the  Bhägavatam  (10.3.46),  babhüva  präkåtaù  çiçuù:  He
became just like an ordinary child, an ordinary human being. Now, here again
it is indicated that the Lord’s appearance as an ordinary human being is one of
the  features  of  His  transcendental  body.  In  the  Eleventh  Chapter  of
Bhagavad-gétä  also  it  is  stated  that  Arjuna  prayed  to  see  Kåñëa’s  form  of  four
hands  (tenaiva  rüpeëa  catur-bhujena). After revealing this form, Kåñëa, when
petitioned  by  Arjuna,  again  assumed  His  original  humanlike  form  (mänuñaà
rüpam). These different features of the Supreme Lord are certainly not those
of an ordinary human being.

is 

Some of those who deride Kåñëa and who are infected with the Mäyävädé
philosophy quote the following verse from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.29.21) to
prove  that  Kåñëa 
just  an  ordinary  man.  Ahaà  sarveñu  bhüteñu
bhütätmävasthitaù  sadä:  “The  Supreme  is  present  in  every  living  entity.”  We
should better take note of this particular verse from the Vaiñëava äcäryas like
Jéva  Gosvämé  and  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  instead  of  following  the
interpretation  of  unauthorized  persons  who  deride  Kåñëa.  Jéva  Gosvämé,
commenting  on  this  verse,  says  that  Kåñëa,  in  His  plenary  expansion  as

Paramätmä,  is  situated  in  the  moving  and  the  nonmoving  entities  as  the
Supersoul,  so  any  neophyte  devotee  who  simply  gives  his  attention  to  the
arcä-mürti, the form of the Supreme Lord in the temple, and does not respect
other living entities is uselessly worshiping the form of the Lord in the temple.
There  are  three  kinds  of  devotees  of  the  Lord,  and  the  neophyte  is  in  the
lowest  stage.  The  neophyte  devotee  gives  more  attention  to  the  Deity  in  the
temple than to other devotees, so Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura warns that
this sort of mentality should be corrected. A devotee should see that because
Kåñëa  is  present  in  everyone’s  heart  as  Paramätmä,  every  body  is  the
embodiment or the temple of the Supreme Lord; so as one offers respect to the
temple of the Lord, he should similarly properly respect each and every body in
which  the  Paramätmä  dwells.  Everyone  should  therefore  be  given  proper
respect and should not be neglected.

There  are  also  many  impersonalists  who  deride  temple  worship.  They  say
that  since  God  is  everywhere,  why  should  one  restrict  himself  to  temple
worship?  But  if  God  is  everywhere,  is  He  not  in  the  temple  or  in  the  Deity?
Although  the  personalist  and  the  impersonalist  will  fight  with  one  another
perpetually,  a  perfect  devotee  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  knows  that  although
Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality,  He  is  all-pervading,  as  confirmed  in  the
Brahma-saàhitä. Although His personal abode is Goloka Våndävana and He is
always  staying  there,  by  His  different  manifestations  of  energy  and  by  His
plenary  expansion  He  is  present  everywhere  in  all  parts  of  the  material  and
spiritual creation.

TEXT  12

MaaegaaXaa Maaegak-MaaR<aae MaaegajaNaa ivceTaSa" )

ra+aSaqMaaSaurq& cEv Pa[k*-iTa& MaaeihNaq& ié[Taa" )) 12 ))

moghäçä mogha-karmäëo
mogha-jïänä vicetasaù
räkñasém äsuréà caiva
prakåtià mohinéà çritäù

SYNONYMS

mogha-äçäù—baffled in their hopes; mogha-karmäëaù—baffled in fruitive
activities; mogha-jïänäù—baffled in knowledge; vicetasaù—bewildered;
räkñasém—demonic; äsurém—atheistic; ca—and; eva—certainly;
prakåtim—nature; mohiném—bewildering; çritäù—taking shelter of.

TRANSLATION

Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic views.

In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities,
and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.

PURPORT

There  are  many  devotees  who  assume  themselves  to  be  in  Kåñëa
consciousness and devotional service but at heart do not accept the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, as the Absolute Truth. For them, the fruit of
devotional  service—going  back  to  Godhead—will  never  be  tasted.  Similarly,
those  who  are  engaged  in  fruitive  pious  activities  and  who  are  ultimately
hoping to be liberated from this material entanglement will never be successful
either,  because  they  deride  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa.  In
other words, persons who mock Kåñëa are to be understood to be demonic or
atheistic. As described in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, such demonic
miscreants  never  surrender  to  Kåñëa.  Therefore  their  mental  speculations  to
arrive  at  the  Absolute  Truth  bring  them  to  the  false  conclusion  that  the
ordinary  living  entity  and  Kåñëa  are  one  and  the  same.  With  such  a  false
conviction,  they  think  that  the  body  of  any  human  being  is  now  simply
covered  by  material  nature  and  that  as  soon  as  one  is  liberated  from  this
material body there is no difference between God and himself. This attempt to
become one with Kåñëa will be baffled because of delusion. Such atheistic and
demoniac  cultivation  of  spiritual  knowledge  is  always  futile.  That  is  the
indication of this verse. For such persons, cultivation of the knowledge in the

Vedic literature, like the Vedänta-sütra and the Upaniñads. is always baffled.

It is a great offense, therefore, to consider Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality
of  Godhead,  to  be  an  ordinary  man.  Those  who  do  so  are  certainly  deluded
because 
form  of  Kåñëa.  The
Båhad-viñëu-småti clearly states:

they  cannot  understand 

the  eternal 

yo vetti bhautikaà dehaà
kåñëasya paramätmanaù
sa sarvasmäd bahiñ-käryaù
çrauta-smärta-vidhänataù
mukhaà tasyävalokyäpi
sa-celaà snänam äcaret

“One who considers the body of Kåñëa to be material should be driven out
from all rituals and activities of the çruti and the småti. And if one by chance
sees  his  face,  one  should  at  once  take  bath  in  the  Ganges  to  rid  himself  of
infection.  People  jeer  at  Kåñëa  because  they  are  envious  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Their destiny is certainly to take birth after birth in
the  species  of  atheistic  and  demoniac  life.  Perpetually,  their  real  knowledge
will  remain  under  delusion,  and  gradually  they  will  regress  to  the  darkest
region of creation.”

TEXT  13

MahaTMaaNaSTau Maa& PaaQaR dEvq& Pa[k*-iTaMaaié[Taa" )

>aJaNTYaNaNYaMaNaSaae jaTva >aUTaaidMaVYaYaMa( )) 13 ))

mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha
daivéà prakåtim äçritäù
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jïätvä bhütädim avyayam

SYNONYMS

mahä-ätmänaù—the great souls; tu—but; mäm—unto Me; pärtha—O son of

Påthä; daivém—divine; prakåtim—nature; äçritäù—having taken shelter of;
bhajanti—render service; ananya-manasaù—without deviation of the mind;
jïätvä—knowing; bhüta—of creation; ädim—the origin;
avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the
protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service
because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and
inexhaustible.

PURPORT

In this verse the description of the mahätmä is clearly given. The first sign
of  the  mahätmä  is  that  he  is  already  situated  in  the  divine  nature.  He  is  not
under  the  control  of  material  nature.  And  how  is  this  effected?  That  is
explained  in  the  Seventh  Chapter:  one  who  surrenders  unto  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, at once becomes freed from the control of
material  nature.  That  is  the  qualification.  One  can  become  free  from  the
control  of  material  nature  as  soon  as  he  surrenders  his  soul  to  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  That  is  the  preliminary  formula.  Being  marginal
potency,  as  soon  as  the  living  entity  is  freed  from  the  control  of  material
nature, he is put under the guidance of the spiritual nature. The guidance of
the  spiritual  nature  is  called  daivé  prakåti,  divine  nature.  So  when  one  is
promoted  in  that  way—by  surrendering  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead—one attains to the stage of great soul, mahätmä.

The  mahätmä  does  not  divert  his  attention  to  anything  outside  Kåñëa,
because he knows perfectly well that Kåñëa is the original Supreme Person, the
cause of all causes. There is no doubt about it. Such a mahätmä, or great soul,
develops  through  association  with  other  mahätmäs,  pure  devotees.  Pure
devotees  are  not  even  attracted  by  Kåñëa’s  other  features,  such  as  the
four-armed Mahä-Viñëu. They are simply attracted by the two-armed form of
Kåñëa.  They  are  not  attracted  to  other  features  of  Kåñëa,  nor  are  they

concerned  with  any  form  of  a  demigod  or  of  a  human  being.  They  meditate
only  upon  Kåñëa  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  They  are  always  engaged  in  the
unswerving service of the Lord in Kåñëa consciousness.

TEXT  14

SaTaTa& k-ITaRYaNTaae Maa& YaTaNTaê d*!v]Taa" )

NaMaSYaNTaê Maa& >a¢-ya iNaTYaYau¢-a oPaaSaTae )) 14 ))

satataà kértayanto mäà
yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù
namasyantaç ca mäà bhaktyä
nitya-yuktä upäsate

SYNONYMS

satatam—always; kértayantaù—chanting; mäm—about Me; yatantaù—fully
endeavoring; ca—also; dåòha-vratäù—with determination;
namasyantaù—offering obeisances; ca—and; mäm—Me; bhaktyä—in
devotion; nitya-yuktäù—perpetually engaged; upäsate—worship.

TRANSLATION

Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing

down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion.

PURPORT

The  mahätmä  cannot  be  manufactured  by  rubber-stamping  an  ordinary
man.  His  symptoms  are  described  here:  a  mahätmä  is  always  engaged  in
chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead.
He has no other business. He is always engaged in the glorification of the Lord.
In other words, he is not an impersonalist. When the question of glorification
is  there,  one  has  to  glorify  the  Supreme  Lord,  praising  His  holy  name,  His

eternal  form,  His  transcendental  qualities  and  His  uncommon  pastimes.  One
has to glorify all these things; therefore a mahätmä is attached to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

activities 

of  devotional 

One  who  is  attached  to  the  impersonal  feature  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  the
brahmajyoti, is not described as mahätmä in the Bhagavad-gétä. He is described
in  a  different  way  in  the  next  verse.  The  mahätmä  is  always  engaged  in
different 
the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  hearing  and  chanting  about  Viñëu,  not  a  demigod  or
human  being.  That  is  devotion:  çravaëaà  kértanaà  viñëoù  and  smaraëam,
remembering Him. Such a mahätmä has firm determination to achieve at the
ultimate  end  the  association  of  the  Supreme  Lord  in  any  one  of  the  five
transcendental 
all
activities—mental,  bodily  and  vocal,  everything—in  the  service  of  the
Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa. That is called full Kåñëa consciousness.

as  described 

success,  he 

rasas.  To 

engages 

achieve 

service, 

that 

in 

In  devotional  service  there  are  certain  activities  which  are  called
determined, such as fasting on certain days, like the eleventh day of the moon,
Ekädaçé,  and  on  the  appearance  day  of  the  Lord.  All  these  rules  and
regulations  are  offered  by  the  great  äcäryas  for  those  who  are  actually
interested in getting admission into the association of the Supreme Personality
of  Godhead  in  the  transcendental  world.  The  mahätmäs,  great  souls,  strictly
observe all these rules and regulations, and therefore they are sure to achieve
the desired result.

As described in the second verse of this chapter, not only is this devotional
service easy, but it can be performed in a happy mood. One does not need to
undergo any severe penance and austerity. He can live this life in devotional
service,  guided  by  an  expert  spiritual  master,  and  in  any  position,  either  as  a
householder  or  a  sannyäsé  or  a  brahmacäré;  in  any  position  and  anywhere  in
the world, he can perform this devotional service to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and thus become actually mahätmä, a great soul.

TEXT  15

jaNaYajeNa caPYaNYae YaJaNTaae MaaMauPaaSaTae )

Wk-TveNa Pa*Qa¤e-Na bhuDaa ivìTaaeMau%Ma( )) 15 ))

jïäna-yajïena cäpy anye
yajanto mäm upäsate
ekatvena påthaktvena
bahudhä viçvato-mukham

SYNONYMS

jïäna-yajïena—by cultivation of knowledge; ca—also; api—certainly;
anye—others; yajantaù—sacrificing; mäm—Me; upäsate—worship;
ekatvena—in oneness; påthaktvena—in duality; bahudhä—in diversity;
viçvataù-mukham—and in the universal form.

TRANSLATION

Others, who engage in sacrifice by the cultivation of knowledge, worship the

Supreme Lord as the one without a second, as diverse in many, and in the
universal form.

PURPORT

This verse is the summary of the previous verses. The Lord tells Arjuna that
those who are purely in Kåñëa consciousness and do not know anything other
than  Kåñëa  are  called  mahätmä;  yet  there  are  other  persons  who  are  not
exactly  in  the  position  of  mahätmä  but  who  worship  Kåñëa  also,  in  different
ways.  Some  of  them  have  already  been  described  as  the  distressed,  the
financially  destitute,  the  inquisitive,  and  those  who  are  engaged  in  the
cultivation  of  knowledge.  But  there  are  others  who  are  still  lower,  and  these
are divided into three: (1) he who worships himself as one with the Supreme
Lord, (2) he who concocts some form of the Supreme Lord and worships that,
and  (3)  he  who  accepts  the  universal  form,  the  viçvarüpa  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and worships that. Out of the above three, the lowest,
those who worship themselves as the Supreme Lord, thinking themselves to be

monists,  are  most  predominant.  Such  people  think  themselves  to  be  the
Supreme  Lord,  and  in  this  mentality  they  worship  themselves.  This  is  also  a
type  of  God  worship,  for  they  can  understand  that  they  are  not  the  material
body  but  are  actually  spiritual  soul;  at  least,  such  a  sense  is  prominent.
Generally  the  impersonalists  worship  the  Supreme  Lord  in  this  way.  The
second  class  includes  the  worshipers  of  the  demigods,  those  who  by
imagination consider any form to be the form of the Supreme Lord. And the
third  class  includes  those  who  cannot  conceive  of  anything  beyond  the
manifestation of this material universe. They consider the universe to be the
supreme  organism  or  entity  and  worship  that.  The  universe  is  also  a  form  of
the Lord.

TEXT  16

Ah& §-Taurh& Yaj" SvDaahMahMaaEzDaMa( )

MaN}aae_hMahMaevaJYaMahMaiGanrh& huTaMa( )) 16 ))

ahaà kratur ahaà yajïaù
svadhäham aham auñadham
mantro ’ham aham eväjyam
aham agnir ahaà hutam

SYNONYMS

aham—I; kratuù—Vedic ritual; aham—I; yajïaù—småti sacrifice;
svadhä—oblation; aham—I; aham—I; auñadham—healing herb;
mantraù—transcendental chant; aham—I; aham—I; eva—certainly;
äjyam—melted butter; aham—I; agniù—fire; aham—I; hutam—offering.

TRANSLATION

But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the ancestors,
the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butter and the fire and the
offering.

PURPORT

The  Vedic  sacrifice  known  as  jyotiñöoma  is  also  Kåñëa,  and  He  is  also  the
mahä-yajïa  mentioned  in  the  småti.  The  oblations  offered  to  the  Pitåloka  or
the sacrifice performed to please the Pitåloka, considered as a kind of drug in
the  form  of  clarified  butter,  is  also  Kåñëa.  The  mantras  chanted  in  this
connection  are  also  Kåñëa.  And  many  other  commodities  made  with  milk
products  for  offering  in  the  sacrifices  are  also  Kåñëa.  The  fire  is  also  Kåñëa
because fire is one of the five material elements and is therefore claimed as the
separated energy of Kåñëa. In other words, the Vedic sacrifices recommended
in the karma-käëòa division of the Vedas are in total also Kåñëa. Or, in other
words, those who are engaged in rendering devotional service unto Kåñëa are
to  be  understood  to  have  performed  all  the  sacrifices  recommended  in  the
Vedas.

TEXT  17

iPaTaahMaSYa JaGaTaae MaaTaa DaaTaa iPaTaaMah" )

veÛ& Paiv}aMa( pk-ar ‰k(- SaaMa YaJaurev c )) 17 ))

pitäham asya jagato
mätä dhätä pitämahaù
vedyaà pavitram oàkära
åk säma yajur eva ca

SYNONYMS

pitä—father; aham—I; asya—of this; jagataù—universe; mätä—mother;
dhätä—supporter; pitämahaù—grandfather; vedyam—what is to be known;
pavitram—that which purifies; oà-kära—the syllable oà; åk—the Åg Veda;
säma—the Säma Veda; yajuù—the Yajur Veda; eva—certainly; ca—and.

TRANSLATION

I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support and the grandsire. I

am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable oà. I am also the Åg,
the Säma and the Yajur Vedas.

PURPORT

The entire cosmic manifestations, moving and nonmoving, are manifested
by  different  activities  of  Kåñëa’s  energy.  In  the  material  existence  we  create
different  relationships  with  different  living  entities  who  are  nothing  but
Kåñëa’s marginal energy; under the creation of prakåti some of them appear as
our  father,  mother,  grandfather,  creator,  etc.,  but  actually  they  are  parts  and
parcels  of  Kåñëa.  As  such,  these  living  entities  who  appear  to  be  our  father,
mother,  etc.,  are  nothing  but  Kåñëa.  In  this  verse  the  word  dhätä  means
“creator.” Not only are our father and mother parts and parcels of Kåñëa, but
the  creator,  grandmother  and  grandfather,  etc.,  are  also  Kåñëa.  Actually  any
living entity, being part and parcel of Kåñëa, is Kåñëa. All the Vedas, therefore,
aim only toward Kåñëa. Whatever we want to know through the Vedas is but a
progressive step toward understanding Kåñëa. That subject matter which helps
us  purify  our  constitutional  position  is  especially  Kåñëa.  Similarly,  the  living
entity  who  is  inquisitive  to  understand  all  Vedic  principles  is  also  part  and
parcel  of  Kåñëa  and  as  such  is  also  Kåñëa.  In  all  the  Vedic  mantras  the  word
oà, called praëava, is a transcendental sound vibration and is also Kåñëa. And
because  in  all  the  hymns  of  the  four  Vedas—Säma,  Yajur,  Åg  and
Atharva—the  praëava,  or  oàkära,  is  very  prominent,  it  is  understood  to  be
Kåñëa.

TEXT  18

GaiTa>aRTaaR Pa[>au" Saa+aq iNavaSa" Xar<a& SauôTa( )

Pa[>av" Pa[l/Ya" SQaaNa& iNaDaaNa& bqJaMaVYaYaMa( )) 18 ))

gatir bhartä prabhuù säkñé
niväsaù çaraëaà suhåt
prabhavaù pralayaù sthänaà
nidhänaà béjam avyayam

SYNONYMS

gatiù—goal; bhartä—sustainer; prabhuù—Lord; säkñé—witness;
niväsaù—abode; çaraëam—refuge; su-håt—most intimate friend;
prabhavaù—creation; pralayaù—dissolution; sthänam—ground;
nidhänam—resting place; béjam—seed; avyayam—imperishable.

TRANSLATION

I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the refuge,

and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the annihilation, the basis of
everything, the resting place and the eternal seed.

PURPORT

Gati  means  the  destination  where  we  want  to  go.  But  the  ultimate  goal  is
Kåñëa,  although  people  do  not  know  it.  One  who  does  not  know  Kåñëa  is
misled,  and  his  so-called  progressive  march  is  either  partial  or  hallucinatory.
There are many who make as their destination different demigods, and by rigid
performance  of  the  strict  respective  methods  they  reach  different  planets
known as Candraloka, Süryaloka, Indraloka, Maharloka, etc. But all such lokas,
or planets, being creations of Kåñëa, are simultaneously Kåñëa and not Kåñëa.
Such  planets,  being  manifestations  of  Kåñëa’s  energy,  are  also  Kåñëa,  but
actually they serve only as a step forward for realization of Kåñëa. To approach
the  different  energies  of  Kåñëa  is  to  approach  Kåñëa  indirectly.  One  should
directly  approach  Kåñëa,  for  that  will  save  time  and  energy.  For  example,  if
there is a possibility of going to the top of a building by the help of an elevator,
why  should  one  go  by  the  staircase,  step  by  step?  Everything  is  resting  on
Kåñëa’s  energy;  therefore  without  Kåñëa’s  shelter  nothing  can  exist.  Kåñëa  is

the supreme ruler because everything belongs to Him and everything exists on
His energy. Kåñëa, being situated in everyone’s heart, is the supreme witness.
The residences, countries or planets on which we live are also Kåñëa. Kåñëa is
the  ultimate  goal  of  shelter,  and  therefore  one  should  take  shelter  of  Kåñëa
either for protection or for annihilation of his distress. And whenever we have
to take protection, we should know that our protection must be a living force.
Kåñëa  is  the  supreme  living  entity.  And  since  Kåñëa  is  the  source  of  our
generation, or the supreme father, no one can be a better friend than Kåñëa,
nor can anyone be a better well-wisher. Kåñëa is the original source of creation
and the ultimate rest after annihilation. Kåñëa is therefore the eternal cause of
all causes.

TEXT  19

TaPaaMYahMah& vz| iNaGa*õaMYauTSa*JaaiMa c )

AMa*Ta& cEv Ma*TYauê SadSaÀahMaJauRNa )) 19 ))

tapämy aham ahaà varñaà
nigåhëämy utsåjämi ca
amåtaà caiva måtyuç ca
sad asac cäham arjuna

SYNONYMS

tapämi—give heat; aham—I; aham—I; varñam—rain; nigåhëämi—withhold;
utsåjämi—send forth; ca—and; amåtam—immortality; ca—and;
eva—certainly; måtyuù—death; ca—and; sat—spirit; asat—matter; ca—and;
aham—I; arjuna—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, I give heat, and I withhold and send forth the rain. I am

immortality, and I am also death personified. Both spirit and matter are in Me.

PURPORT

Kåñëa, by His different energies, diffuses heat and light through the agency
of electricity and the sun. During summer season it is Kåñëa who checks rain
from falling from the sky, and then during the rainy season He gives unceasing
torrents  of  rain.  The  energy  which  sustains  us  by  prolonging  the  duration  of
our life is Kåñëa, and Kåñëa meets us at the end as death. By analyzing all these
different  energies  of  Kåñëa,  one  can  ascertain  that  for  Kåñëa  there  is  no
distinction  between  matter  and  spirit,  or,  in  other  words,  He  is  both  matter
and spirit. In the advanced stage of Kåñëa consciousness, one therefore makes
no such distinctions. He sees only Kåñëa in everything.

Since  Kåñëa  is  both  matter  and  spirit,  the  gigantic  universal  form
comprising  all  material  manifestations  is  also  Kåñëa,  and  His  pastimes  in
Våndävana as two-handed Çyämasundara, playing on a flute, are those of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  20

}aEivÛa Maa& SaaeMaPaa" PaUTaPaaPaa

 YajEirîa SvGaRiTa& Pa[aQaRYaNTae )

Tae Pau<YaMaaSaaÛ SaureNd]l/aek-‚

 MaéniNTa idVYaaiNdiv dev>aaeGaaNa( )) 20 ))

trai-vidyä mäà soma-päù püta-päpä
yajïair iñövä svar-gatià prärthayante
te puëyam äsädya surendra-lokam
açnanti divyän divi deva-bhogän

SYNONYMS

trai-vidyäù—the knowers of the three Vedas; mäm—Me; soma-päù—drinkers
of soma juice; püta—purified; päpäù—of sins; yajïaiù—with sacrifices;

iñövä—worshiping; svaù-gatim—passage to heaven; prärthayante—pray for;
te—they; puëyam—pious; äsädya—attaining; sura-indra—of Indra;
lokam—the world; açnanti—enjoy; divyän—celestial; divi—in heaven;
deva-bhogän—the pleasures of the gods.

TRANSLATION

Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the heavenly
planets, worship Me indirectly. Purified of sinful reactions, they take birth on
the pious, heavenly planet of Indra, where they enjoy godly delights.

PURPORT

The  word  trai-vidyäù  refers  to  the  three  Vedas—Säma,  Yajur  and  Åg.  A
brähmaëa who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri-vedé. Anyone who is
very much attached to knowledge derived from these three Vedas is respected
in society. Unfortunately, there are many great scholars of the Vedas who do
not  know  the  ultimate  purport  of  studying  them.  Therefore  Kåñëa  herein
declares Himself to be the ultimate goal for the tri-vedés. Actual tri-vedés take
shelter under the lotus feet of Kåñëa and engage in pure devotional service to
satisfy  the  Lord.  Devotional  service  begins  with  the  chanting  of  the  Hare
Kåñëa  mantra  and  side  by  side  trying  to  understand  Kåñëa  in  truth.
Unfortunately  those  who  are  simply  official  students  of  the  Vedas  become
more interested in offering sacrifices to the different demigods like Indra and
Candra. By such endeavor, the worshipers of different demigods are certainly
purified of the contamination of the lower qualities of nature and are thereby
elevated  to  the  higher  planetary  systems  or  heavenly  planets  known  as
Maharloka,  Janoloka,  Tapoloka,  etc.  Once situated on those higher planetary
systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds of thousands of times better than
on this planet.

TEXT  21

Tae Ta& >au¤-a SvGaRl/aek&- ivXaal&/

 +aq<ae Pau<Yae MaTYaRl/aek&- ivXaiNTa )

Wv& }aYaqDaMaRMaNauPa[Paàa

 GaTaaGaTa& k-aMak-aMaa l/>aNTae )) 21 ))

te taà bhuktvä svarga-lokaà viçälaà
kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti
evaà trayé-dharmam anuprapannä
gatägataà käma-kämä labhante

SYNONYMS

te—they; tam—that; bhuktvä—enjoying; svarga-lokam—heaven;
viçälam—vast; kñéëe—being exhausted; puëye—the results of their pious
activities; martya-lokam—to the mortal earth; viçanti—fall down; evam—thus;
trayé—of the three Vedas; dharmam—doctrines; anuprapannäù—following;
gata-ägatam—death and birth; käma-kämäù—desiring sense enjoyments;
labhante—attain.

TRANSLATION

When they have thus enjoyed vast heavenly sense pleasure and the results of

their pious activities are exhausted, they return to this mortal planet again.
Thus those who seek sense enjoyment by adhering to the principles of the three
Vedas achieve only repeated birth and death.

PURPORT

One  who  is  promoted  to  the  higher  planetary  systems  enjoys  a  longer
duration of life and better facilities for sense enjoyment, yet one is not allowed
to stay there forever. One is again sent back to this earth upon finishing the
resultant  fruits  of  pious  activities.  He  who  has  not  attained  perfection  of
knowledge, as indicated in the Vedänta-sütra (janmädy asya yataù), or, in other
words,  he  who  fails  to  understand  Kåñëa,  the  cause  of  all  causes,  becomes
baffled  about  achieving  the  ultimate  goal  of  life  and  is  thus  subjected  to  the

routine of being promoted to the higher planets and then again coming down,
as if situated on a Ferris wheel which sometimes goes up and sometimes comes
down. The purport is that instead of being elevated to the spiritual world, from
which there is no longer any possibility of coming down, one simply revolves
in  the  cycle  of  birth  and  death  on  higher  and  lower  planetary  systems.  One
should better take to the spiritual world to enjoy an eternal life full of bliss and
knowledge and never return to this miserable material existence.

TEXT  22

ANaNYaaiêNTaYaNTaae Maa& Yae JaNaa" PaYauRPaaSaTae

Taeza& iNaTYaai>aYau¢-aNaa& YaaeGa+aeMa& vhaMYahMa( )) 22 ))

ananyäç cintayanto mäà
ye janäù paryupäsate
teñäà nityäbhiyuktänäà
yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham

SYNONYMS

ananyäù—having no other object; cintayantaù—concentrating; mäm—on Me;
ye—those who; janäù—persons; paryupäsate—properly worship; teñäm—of
them; nitya—always; abhiyuktänäm—fixed in devotion; yoga—requirements;
kñemam—protection; vahämi—carry; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

But those who always worship Me with exclusive devotion, meditating on
My transcendental form—to them I carry what they lack, and I preserve what
they have.

PURPORT

One  who  is  unable  to  live  for  a  moment  without  Kåñëa  consciousness

cannot  but  think  of  Kåñëa  twenty-four  hours  a  day,  being  engaged  in
devotional  service  by  hearing,  chanting,  remembering,  offering  prayers,
worshiping,  serving  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Lord,  rendering  other  services,
cultivating  friendship  and  surrendering  fully  to  the  Lord.  Such  activities  are
all auspicious and full of spiritual potencies, which make the devotee perfect in
self-realization,  so  that  his  only  desire  is  to  achieve  the  association  of  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a devotee undoubtedly approaches the
Lord  without  difficulty.  This  is  called  yoga. By the mercy of the Lord, such a
devotee never comes back to this material condition of life. Kñema refers to the
merciful protection of the Lord. The Lord helps the devotee to achieve Kåñëa
consciousness  by  yoga,  and  when  he  becomes  fully  Kåñëa  conscious  the  Lord
protects him from falling down to a miserable conditioned life.

TEXT  23

Yae_PYaNYadevTaa>a¢-a YaJaNTae é[ÖYaaiNvTaa" )

Tae_iPa MaaMaev k-aENTaeYa YaJaNTYaiviDaPaUvRk-Ma( )) 23 ))

ye ’py anya-devatä-bhaktä
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
te ’pi mäm eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pürvakam

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; api—also; anya—of other; devatä—gods; bhaktäù—devotees;
yajante—worship; çraddhayä anvitäù—with faith; te—they; api—also;
mäm—Me; eva—only; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; yajanti—they worship;
avidhi-pürvakam—in a wrong way.

TRANSLATION

Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith
actually worship only Me, O son of Kunté, but they do so in a wrong way.

PURPORT

“Persons  who  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of  demigods  are  not  very
intelligent, although such worship is offered to Me indirectly,” Kåñëa says. For
example, when a man pours water on the leaves and branches of a tree without
pouring water on the root, he does so without sufficient knowledge or without
observing  regulative  principles.  Similarly,  the  process  of  rendering  service  to
different parts of the body is to supply food to the stomach. The demigods are,
so to speak, different officers and directors in the government of the Supreme
Lord. One has to follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers
or  directors.  Similarly,  everyone  is  to  offer  his  worship  to  the  Supreme  Lord
only. That will automatically satisfy the different officers and directors of the
Lord.  The  officers  and  directors  are  engaged  as  representatives  of  the
government, and to offer some bribe to the officers and directors is illegal. This
is stated here as avidhi-pürvakam. In other words, Kåñëa does not approve the
unnecessary worship of the demigods.

TEXT  24

Ah& ih SavRYajaNaa& >aae¢-a c Pa[>aurev c )

Na Tau MaaMai>aJaaNaiNTa TatveNaaTaXCYaviNTa Tae )) 24 ))

ahaà hi sarva-yajïänäà
bhoktä ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mäm abhijänanti
tattvenätaç cyavanti te

SYNONYMS

aham—I; hi—surely; sarva—of all; yajïänäm—sacrifices; bhoktä—the enjoyer;
ca—and; prabhuù—the Lord; eva—also; ca—and; na—not; tu—but;
mäm—Me; abhijänanti—they know; tattvena—in reality; ataù—therefore;
cyavanti—fall down; te—they.

TRANSLATION

I am the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices. Therefore, those who do

not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.

PURPORT

Here  it  is  clearly  stated  that  there  are  many  types  of  yajïa  performances
recommended in the Vedic literatures, but actually all of them are meant for
satisfying  the  Supreme  Lord.  Yajïa  means  Viñëu.  In  the  Third  Chapter  of
Bhagavad-gétä  it  is  clearly  stated  that  one  should  only  work  for  satisfying
Yajïa,  or  Viñëu.  The  perfectional  form  of  human  civilization,  known  as
varëäçrama-dharma,  is  specifically  meant  for  satisfying  Viñëu.  Therefore,
Kåñëa  says  in  this  verse,  “I  am  the  enjoyer  of  all  sacrifices  because  I  am  the
supreme master.” Less intelligent persons, however, without knowing this fact,
worship demigods for temporary benefit. Therefore they fall down to material
existence and do not achieve the desired goal of life. If, however, anyone has
any  material  desire  to  be  fulfilled,  he  had  better  pray  for  it  to  the  Supreme
Lord (although that is not pure devotion), and he will thus achieve the desired
result.

TEXT  25

YaaiNTa devv]Taa devaiNPaTa›NYaaiNTa iPaTa*v]Taa" )

>aUTaaiNa YaaiNTa >aUTaeJYaa YaaiNTa MaÛaiJaNaae_iPa MaaMa( )) 25 ))

yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino ’pi mäm

SYNONYMS

yänti—go; deva-vratäù—worshipers of demigods; devän—to the demigods;
pitèn—to the ancestors; yänti—go; pitå-vratäù—worshipers of ancestors;
bhütäni—to the ghosts and spirits; yänti—go; bhüta-ijyäù—worshipers of
ghosts and spirits; yänti—go; mat—My; yäjinaù—devotees; api—but;
mäm—unto Me.

TRANSLATION

Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those

who worship the ancestors go to the ancestors; those who worship ghosts and
spirits will take birth among such beings; and those who worship Me will live
with Me.

PURPORT

If  one  has  any  desire  to  go  to  the  moon,  the  sun  or  any  other  planet,  one
can  attain  the  desired  destination  by  following  specific  Vedic  principles
recommended  for  that  purpose,  such  as  the  process  technically  known  as
darça-paurëamäsé. These are vividly described in the fruitive activities portion
of  the  Vedas,  which  recommends  a  specific  worship  of  demigods  situated  on
different  heavenly  planets.  Similarly,  one  can  attain  the  Pitä  planets  by
performing a specific yajïa. Similarly, one can go to many ghostly planets and
become a Yakña, Rakña or Piçäca. Piçäca worship is called “black arts” or “black
magic.” There are many men who practice this black art, and they think that it
is spiritualism, but such activities are completely materialistic. Similarly, a pure
devotee, who worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead only, achieves the
planets  of  Vaikuëöha  and  Kåñëaloka  without  a  doubt.  It  is  very  easy  to
understand  through  this  important  verse  that  if  by  simply  worshiping  the
demigods  one  can  achieve  the  heavenly  planets,  or  by  worshiping  the  Pitäs
achieve  the  Pitä  planets,  or  by  practicing  the  black  arts  achieve  the  ghostly
planets, why can the pure devotee not achieve the planet of Kåñëa or Viñëu?
Unfortunately  many  people  have  no  information  of  these  sublime  planets
where Kåñëa and Viñëu live, and because they do not know of them they fall
down.  Even  the  impersonalists  fall  down  from  the  brahmajyoti.  The  Kåñëa

consciousness  movement  is  therefore  distributing  sublime  information  to  the
entire  human  society  to  the  effect  that  by  simply  chanting  the  Hare  Kåñëa
mantra  one  can  become  perfect  in  this  life  and  go  back  home,  back  to
Godhead.

TEXT  26

Pa}a& PauZPa& f-l&/ TaaeYa& Yaae Mae >a¢-ya Pa[YaC^iTa )

Tadh& >a¢-yuPaôTaMaénaiMa Pa[YaTaaTMaNa" )) 26 ))

patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù

SYNONYMS

patram—a leaf; puñpam—a flower; phalam—a fruit; toyam—water;
yaù—whoever; me—unto Me; bhaktyä—with devotion; prayacchati—offers;
tat—that; aham—I; bhakti-upahåtam—offered in devotion; açnämi—accept;
prayata-ätmanaù—from one in pure consciousness.

TRANSLATION

If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will

accept it.

PURPORT

For  the  intelligent  person,  it  is  essential  to  be  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, in order to achieve a
permanent, blissful abode for eternal happiness. The process of achieving such
a marvelous result is very easy and can be attempted even by the poorest of the
poor, without any kind of qualification. The only qualification required in this

connection is to be a pure devotee of the Lord. It does not matter what one is
or where one is situated. The process is so easy that even a leaf or a little water
or fruit can be offered to the Supreme Lord in genuine love and the Lord will
be  pleased  to  accept  it.  No  one,  therefore,  can  be  barred  from  Kåñëa
consciousness,  because  it  is  so  easy  and  universal. Who  is  such a fool that he
does not want to be Kåñëa conscious by this simple method and thus attain the
highest  perfectional  life  of  eternity,  bliss  and  knowledge?  Kåñëa  wants  only
loving  service  and  nothing  more.  Kåñëa  accepts  even  a  little  flower  from  His
pure devotee. He does not want any kind of offering from a nondevotee. He is
not in need of anything from anyone, because He is self-sufficient, and yet He
accepts  the  offering  of  His  devotee  in  an  exchange  of  love  and  affection.  To
develop  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  the  highest  perfection  of  life.  Bhakti  is
mentioned  twice  in  this  verse  in  order  to  declare  more  emphatically  that
bhakti,  or  devotional  service,  is  the  only  means  to  approach  Kåñëa.  No  other
condition, such as becoming a brähmaëa. a learned scholar, a very rich man or
a  great  philosopher,  can  induce  Kåñëa  to  accept  some  offering.  Without  the
basic  principle  of  bhakti,  nothing  can  induce  the  Lord  to  agree  to  accept
anything  from  anyone.  Bhakti  is  never  causal.  The  process  is  eternal.  It  is
direct action in service to the absolute whole.

Here  Lord  Kåñëa,  having  established  that  He  is  the  only  enjoyer,  the
primeval Lord and the real object of all sacrificial offerings, reveals what types
of  sacrifices  He  desires  to  be  offered.  If  one  wishes  to  engage  in  devotional
service  to  the  Supreme  in  order  to  be  purified  and  to  reach  the  goal  of
life—the  transcendental  loving  service  of  God—then  one  should  find  out
what the Lord desires of him. One who loves Kåñëa will give Him whatever He
wants, and he avoids offering anything which is undesirable or unasked. Thus
meat, fish and eggs should not be offered to Kåñëa. If He desired such things as
offerings, He would have said so. Instead He clearly requests that a leaf, fruit,
flowers and water be given to Him, and He says of this offering, “I will accept
it.”  Therefore,  we  should  understand  that  He  will  not  accept  meat,  fish  and
eggs. Vegetables, grains, fruits, milk and water are the proper foods for human
beings and are prescribed by Lord Kåñëa Himself. Whatever else we eat cannot
be offered to Him, since He will not accept it. Thus we cannot be acting on the

level of loving devotion if we offer such foods.

In  the  Third  Chapter,  verse  thirteen,  Çré  Kåñëa  explains  that  only  the
remains  of  sacrifice  are  purified  and  fit  for  consumption  by  those  who  are
seeking  advancement  in  life  and  release  from  the  clutches  of  the  material
entanglement. Those who do not make an offering of their food, He says in the
same verse, are eating only sin. In other words, their every mouthful is simply
deepening  their  involvement  in  the  complexities  of  material  nature.  But
preparing  nice,  simple  vegetable  dishes,  offering  them  before  the  picture  or
Deity of Lord Kåñëa and bowing down and praying for Him to accept such a
humble offering enables one to advance steadily in life, to purify the body, and
to  create  fine  brain  tissues  which  will  lead  to  clear  thinking.  Above  all,  the
offering should be made with an attitude of love. Kåñëa has no need of food,
since He already possesses everything that be, yet He will accept the offering
of  one  who  desires  to  please  Him  in  that  way.  The  important  element,  in
preparation, in serving and in offering, is to act with love for Kåñëa.

The  impersonalist  philosophers,  who  wish  to  maintain  that  the  Absolute
Truth  is  without  senses,  cannot  comprehend  this  verse  of  Bhagavad-gétä.  To
them, it is either a metaphor or proof of the mundane character of Kåñëa, the
speaker of the Bhagavad-gétä. But, in actuality, Kåñëa, the Supreme Godhead,
has senses, and it is stated that His senses are interchangeable; in other words,
one sense can perform the function of any other. This is what it means to say
that Kåñëa is absolute. Lacking senses, He could hardly be considered full in all
opulences. In the Seventh Chapter, Kåñëa has explained that He impregnates
the  living  entities  into  material  nature.  This  is  done  by  His  looking  upon
material nature. And so in this instance, Kåñëa’s hearing the devotee’s words
of  love  in  offering  foodstuffs  is  wholly  identical  with  His  eating  and  actually
tasting. This point should be emphasized: because of His absolute position, His
hearing is wholly identical with His eating and tasting. Only the devotee, who
accepts Kåñëa as He describes Himself, without interpretation, can understand
that the Supreme Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it.

TEXT  27

YaTk-raeiz YadénaiSa YaÂuhaeiz ddaiSa YaTa( )

YataPaSYaiSa k-aENTaeYa TaTku-åZv MadPaR<aMa( )) 27 ))

yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam

SYNONYMS

yat—whatever; karoñi—you do; yat—whatever; açnäsi—you eat;
yat—whatever; juhoñi—you offer; dadäsi—you give away; yat—whatever;
yat—whatever; tapasyasi—austerities you perform; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
tat—that; kuruñva—do; mat—unto Me; arpaëam—as an offering.

TRANSLATION

Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or give away, and
whatever austerities you perform—do that, O son of Kunté, as an offering to
Me.

PURPORT

Thus, it is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he will
not forget Kåñëa in any circumstance. Everyone has to work for maintenance
of his body and soul together, and Kåñëa recommends herein that one should
work  for  Him.  Everyone  has  to  eat  something  to  live;  therefore  he  should
accept  the  remnants  of  foodstuffs  offered to Kåñëa. Any civilized man has to
perform  some  religious  ritualistic  ceremonies;  therefore  Kåñëa  recommends,
“Do  it  for  Me,”  and  this  is  called  arcana.  Everyone  has  a  tendency  to  give
something  in  charity;  Kåñëa  says,  “Give  it  to  Me,”  and  this  means  that  all
surplus  money  accumulated  should  be  utilized  in  furthering  the  Kåñëa
consciousness  movement.  Nowadays  people  are  very  much  inclined  to  the
meditational process, which is not practical in this age, but if anyone practices

meditating  on  Kåñëa  twenty-four  hours  a  day  by  chanting  the  Hare  Kåñëa
mantra  round  his  beads,  he  is  surely  the  greatest  meditator  and  the  greatest
yogé. as substantiated by the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä.

TEXT  28

éu>aaéu>af-lE/rev& Maae+YaSae k-MaRbNDaNaE" )

SaNNYaaSaYaaeGaYau¢-aTMaa ivMau¢-ae MaaMauPaEZYaiSa )) 28 ))

çubhäçubha-phalair evaà
mokñyase karma-bandhanaiù
sannyäsa-yoga-yuktätmä
vimukto mäm upaiñyasi

SYNONYMS

çubha—from auspicious; açubha—and inauspicious; phalaiù—results;
evam—thus; mokñyase—you will become free; karma—of work;
bandhanaiù—from the bondage; sannyäsa—of renunciation; yoga—the yoga;
yukta-ätmä—having the mind firmly set on; vimuktaù—liberated; mäm—to
Me; upaiñyasi—you will attain.

TRANSLATION

In this way you will be freed from bondage to work and its auspicious and

inauspicious results. With your mind fixed on Me in this principle of
renunciation, you will be liberated and come to Me.

PURPORT

One  who  acts  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  under  superior  direction  is  called
yukta. The technical term is yukta-vairagya. This is further explained by Rüpa
Gosvämé as follows:

anäsaktasya viñayän

yathärham upayuïjataù
nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe
yuktaà vairägyam ucyate
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 2.255)

Rüpa Gosvämé says that as long as we are in this material world we have to
act; we cannot cease acting. Therefore if actions are performed and the fruits
are  given  to  Kåñëa,  then  that  is  called  yukta-vairägya.  Actually  situated  in
renunciation,  such  activities  clear  the  mirror  of  the  mind,  and  as  the  actor
gradually  makes  progress  in  spiritual  realization  he  becomes  completely
surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore at the end he
becomes  liberated,  and  this  liberation  is  also  specified.  By  this  liberation  he
does not become one with the brahmajyoti, but rather enters into the planet of
the  Supreme  Lord.  It  is  clearly  mentioned  here:  mäm  upaiñyasi,  “he  comes  to
Me,” back home, back to Godhead. There are five different stages of liberation,
and here it is specified that the devotee who has always lived his lifetime here
under  the  direction  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  as  stated,  has  evolved  to  the  point
where he can, after quitting this body, go back to Godhead and engage directly
in the association of the Supreme Lord.

Anyone  who  has  no  interest  but  to  dedicate  his  life  to  the  service  of  the
Lord is actually a sannyäsé. Such a person always thinks of himself as an eternal
servant,  dependent  on  the  supreme  will  of  the  Lord.  As  such,  whatever  he
does, he does it for the benefit of the Lord. Whatever action he performs, he
performs  it  as  service  to  the  Lord.  He  does  not  give  serious  attention  to  the
fruitive  activities  or  prescribed  duties  mentioned  in  the  Vedas.  For  ordinary
persons  it  is  obligatory  to  execute  the  prescribed  duties  mentioned  in  the
Vedas, but although a pure devotee who is completely engaged in the service of
the  Lord  may  sometimes  appear  to  go  against  the  prescribed  Vedic  duties,
actually it is not so.

It is said, therefore, by Vaiñëava authorities that even the most intelligent
person cannot understand the plans and activities of a pure devotee. The exact
words  are  täìra  väkya,  kriyä,  mudrä  vijïeha  nä  bujhaya  (Caitanya-caritämåta,
Madhya 23.39). A person who is thus always engaged in the service of the Lord
or is always thinking and planning how to serve the Lord is to be considered

completely liberated at present, and in the future his going back home, back to
Godhead, is guaranteed. He is above all materialistic criticism, just as Kåñëa is
above all criticism.

TEXT  29

SaMaae_h& SavR>aUTaezu Na Mae ÜeZYaae_iSTa Na iPa[Ya" )

Yae >aJaiNTa Tau Maa& >a¢-ya MaiYa Tae Taezu caPYahMa( )) 29 ))

samo ’haà sarva-bhüteñu
na me dveñyo ’sti na priyaù
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham

SYNONYMS

samaù—equally disposed; aham—I; sarva-bhüteñu—to all living entities;
na—no one; me—to Me; dveñyaù—hateful; asti—is; na—nor; priyaù—dear;
ye—those who; bhajanti—render transcendental service; tu—but; mäm—unto
Me; bhaktyä—in devotion; mayi—are in Me; te—such persons; teñu—in them;
ca—also; api—certainly; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend
to him.

PURPORT

One may question here that if Kåñëa is equal to everyone and no one is His
special friend, then why does He take a special interest in the devotees who are
always engaged in His transcendental service? But this is not discrimination; it
is natural. Any man in this material world may be very charitably disposed, yet

he has a special interest in his own children. The Lord claims that every living
entity—in  whatever  form—is  His  son,  and  so  He  provides  everyone  with  a
generous  supply  of  the  necessities  of  life.  He  is  just  like  a  cloud  which  pours
rain all over, regardless of whether it falls on rock or land or water. But for His
devotees, He gives specific attention. Such devotees are mentioned here: they
in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  and  therefore  they  are  always
are  always 
transcendentally  situated  in  Kåñëa.  The  very  phrase  “Kåñëa  consciousness”
suggests that those who are in such consciousness are living transcendentalists,
situated  in  Him.  The  Lord  says  here  distinctly,  mayi  te:  “They  are  in  Me.”
Naturally,  as  a  result,  the  Lord  is  also  in  them.  This  is  reciprocal.  This  also
explains  the  words  ye  yathä  mäà  prapadyante  täàs  tathaiva  bhajämy  aham:
“Whoever  surrenders  unto  Me,  proportionately  I  take  care  of  him.”  This
transcendental reciprocation exists because both the Lord and the devotee are
conscious. When a diamond is set in a golden ring, it looks very nice. The gold
is  glorified,  and  at  the  same  time  the diamond  is  glorified.  The  Lord  and  the
living entity eternally glitter, and when a living entity becomes inclined to the
service of the Supreme Lord he looks like gold. The Lord is a diamond, and so
this  combination  is  very  nice.  Living  entities  in  a  pure  state  are  called
devotees.  The  Supreme  Lord  becomes  the  devotee  of  His  devotees.  If  a
reciprocal relationship is not present between the devotee and the Lord, then
there  is  no  personalist  philosophy.  In  the  impersonal  philosophy  there  is  no
reciprocation  between  the  Supreme  and  the  living  entity,  but  in  the
personalist philosophy there is.

The example is often given that the Lord is like a desire tree, and whatever
one wants from this desire tree, the Lord supplies. But here the explanation is
more  complete.  The  Lord  is  here  stated  to  be  partial  to  the  devotees.  This  is
the  manifestation  of  the  Lord’s  special  mercy  to  the  devotees.  The  Lord’s
reciprocation  should  not  be  considered  to  be  under  the  law  of  karma.  It
belongs  to  the  transcendental  situation  in  which  the  Lord  and  His  devotees
function.  Devotional  service  to  the  Lord  is  not  an  activity  of  this  material
world;  it  is  part  of  the  spiritual  world,  where  eternity,  bliss  and  knowledge
predominate.

TEXT  30

AiPa ceTSauduracarae >aJaTae MaaMaNaNYa>aak(- )

SaaDaurev Sa MaNTaVYa" SaMYaGVYaviSaTaae ih Sa" )) 30 ))

api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù

SYNONYMS

api—even; cet—if; su-duräcäraù—one committing the most abominable
actions; bhajate—is engaged in devotional service; mäm—unto Me;
ananya-bhäk—without deviation; sädhuù—a saint; eva—certainly; saù—he;
mantavyaù—is to be considered; samyak—completely; vyavasitaù—situated in
determination; hi—certainly; saù—he.

TRANSLATION

Even if one commits the most abominable action, if he is engaged in

devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated
in his determination.

PURPORT

The word su-duräcäraù used in this verse is very significant, and we should
understand it properly. When a living entity is conditioned, he has two kinds
of  activities:  one  is  conditional,  and  the  other  is  constitutional.  As  for
protecting the body or abiding by the rules of society and state, certainly there
are  different  activities,  even  for  the  devotees,  in  connection  with  the
conditional  life,  and  such  activities  are  called  conditional.  Besides  these,  the
living  entity  who  is  fully  conscious  of  his  spiritual  nature  and  is  engaged  in
Kåñëa consciousness, or the devotional service of the Lord, has activities which

are  called  transcendental.  Such  activities  are  performed  in  his  constitutional
position,  and  they  are  technically  called  devotional  service.  Now,  in  the
conditioned state, sometimes devotional service and the conditional service in
relation to the body will parallel one another. But then again, sometimes these
activities become opposed to one another. As far as possible, a devotee is very
cautious  so  that  he  does  not  do  anything  that  could  disrupt  his  wholesome
condition.  He  knows  that  perfection  in  his  activities  depends  on  his
progressive realization of Kåñëa consciousness. Sometimes, however, it may be
seen  that  a  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  commits  some  act  which  may  be
taken as most abominable socially or politically. But such a temporary falldown
does not disqualify him. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is stated that if a person
falls down but is wholeheartedly engaged in the transcendental service of the
Supreme  Lord,  the  Lord,  being  situated  within  his  heart,  purifies  him  and
excuses  him  from  that  abomination.  The  material  contamination  is  so  strong
that  even  a  yogé  fully  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  sometimes  becomes
ensnared;  but  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  so  strong  that  such  an  occasional
falldown  is  at  once  rectified.  Therefore  the  process  of  devotional  service  is
always a success. No one should deride a devotee for some accidental falldown
from  the  ideal  path,  for,  as  explained  in  the  next  verse,  such  occasional
falldowns  will  be  stopped  in  due  course,  as  soon  as  a  devotee  is  completely
situated in Kåñëa consciousness.

Therefore  a  person  who  is  situated  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  is  engaged
with determination in the process of chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare should be
considered to be in the transcendental position, even if by chance or accident
he  is  found  to  have  fallen.  The  words  sädhur  eva,  “he  is  saintly,”  are  very
emphatic.  They  are  a  warning  to  the  nondevotees  that  because  of  an
accidental  falldown  a  devotee  should  not  be  derided;  he  should  still  be
considered  saintly  even  if  he  has  accidentally  fallen  down.  And  the  word
mantavyaù is still more emphatic. If one does not follow this rule, and derides a
devotee  for  his  accidental  falldown,  then  one  is  disobeying  the  order  of  the
Supreme Lord. The only qualification of a devotee is to be unflinchingly and
exclusively engaged in devotional service.

In the Nåsiàha Puräëa the following statement is given:

bhagavati ca haräv ananya-cetä
bhåça-malino ’pi viräjate manuñyaù
na hi çaça-kaluña-cchabiù kadäcit
timira-paräbhavatäm upaiti candraù

The meaning is that even if one fully engaged in the devotional service of
the Lord is sometimes found engaged in abominable activities, these activities
should be considered to be like the spots that resemble the mark of a rabbit on
the  moon.  Such  spots  do  not  become  an  impediment  to  the  diffusion  of
moonlight.  Similarly,  the  accidental  falldown  of  a  devotee  from  the  path  of
saintly character does not make him abominable.

On  the  other  hand,  one  should  not  misunderstand  that  a  devotee  in
transcendental devotional service can act in all kinds of abominable ways; this
verse  only  refers  to  an  accident  due  to  the  strong  power  of  material
connections. Devotional service is more or less a declaration of war against the
illusory  energy.  As  long  as  one  is  not  strong  enough  to  fight  the  illusory
energy, there may be accidental falldowns. But when one is strong enough, he
is  no  longer  subjected  to  such  falldowns,  as  previously  explained.  No  one
should take advantage of this verse and commit nonsense and think that he is
still  a  devotee.  If  he  does  not  improve  in his character by devotional service,
then it is to be understood that he is not a high devotee.

TEXT  31

i+aPa[& >aviTa DaMaaRTMaa XaìC^aiNTa& iNaGaC^iTa )

k-aENTaeYa Pa[iTaJaaNaqih Na Mae >a¢-" Pa[<aXYaiTa )) 31 ))

kñipraà bhavati dharmätmä
çaçvac-chäntià nigacchati
kaunteya pratijänéhi
na me bhaktaù praëaçyati

SYNONYMS

kñipram—very soon; bhavati—becomes; dharma-ätmä—righteous;
çaçvat-çäntim—lasting peace; nigacchati—attains; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
pratijänéhi—declare; na—never; me—My; bhaktaù—devotee;
praëaçyati—perishes.

TRANSLATION

He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunté,

declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.

PURPORT

This  should  not  be  misunderstood.  In  the  Seventh  Chapter  the  Lord  says
that one who is engaged in mischievous activities cannot become a devotee of
the  Lord.  One  who  is  not  a  devotee  of  the  Lord  has  no  good  qualifications
whatsoever.  The  question  remains,  then,  How  can  a  person  engaged  in
abominable activities—either by accident or by intention—be a pure devotee?
This  question  may  justly  be  raised.  The  miscreants,  as  stated  in  the  Seventh
Chapter, who never come to the devotional service of the Lord, have no good
qualifications, as is stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Generally, a devotee who
is engaged in the nine kinds of devotional activities is engaged in the process
of cleansing all material contamination from the heart. He puts the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  within  his  heart,  and  all  sinful  contaminations  are
naturally washed away. Continuous thinking of the Supreme Lord makes him
pure  by  nature.  According  to  the  Vedas,  there  is  a  certain  regulation  that  if
one  falls  down  from  his  exalted  position  he  has  to  undergo  certain  ritualistic
processes  to  purify  himself.  But  here  there  is  no  such  condition,  because  the
purifying  process  is  already  there  in  the  heart  of  the  devotee,  due  to  his
remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead constantly. Therefore, the
chanting  of  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,
Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare  Hare  should  be  continued  without  stoppage.

This will protect a devotee from all accidental falldowns. He will thus remain
perpetually free from all material contaminations.

TEXT  32

Maa& ih PaaQaR VYaPaaié[TYa Yae_iPa SYau" PaaPaYaaeNaYa" )

iñYaae vEXYaaSTaQaa éUd]aSTae_iPa YaaiNTa Para& GaiTaMa( )) 32 ))

mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya
ye ’pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs
te ’pi yänti paräà gatim

SYNONYMS

mäm—of Me; hi—certainly; pärtha—O son of Påthä; vyapäçritya—particularly
taking shelter; ye—those who; api—also; syuù—are; päpa-yonayaù—born of a
lower family; striyaù—women; vaiçyäù—mercantile people; tathä—also;
çüdräù—lower-class men; te api—even they; yänti—go; paräm—to the
supreme; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaiçyas [merchants] and çüdras [workers]—can attain the
supreme destination.

PURPORT

It  is  clearly  declared  here  by  the  Supreme  Lord  that  in  devotional  service
there is no distinction between the lower and higher classes of people. In the
material conception of life there are such divisions, but for a person engaged in
transcendental  devotional  service  to  the  Lord  there  are  not.  Everyone  is
eligible  for  the  supreme  destination.  In  the Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (2.4.18)  it  is

stated  that  even  the  lowest,  who  are  called  caëòälas  (dog-eaters),  can  be
purified by association with a pure devotee. Therefore devotional service and
the  guidance  of  a  pure  devotee  are  so  strong  that  there  is  no  discrimination
between the lower and higher classes of men; anyone can take to it. The most
simple  man  taking  shelter  of  the  pure  devotee  can  be  purified  by  proper
guidance.  According  to  the  different  modes  of  material  nature,  men  are
classified in the mode of goodness (brähmaëas), the mode of passion (kñatriyas,
or  administrators),  the  mixed  modes  of  passion  and  ignorance  (vaiçyas,  or
merchants), and the mode of ignorance (çüdras, or workers). Those lower than
them are called caëòälas, and they are born in sinful families. Generally, the
association  of  those  born  in  sinful  families  is  not  accepted  by  the  higher
classes. But the process of devotional service is so strong that the pure devotee
of  the  Supreme  Lord  can  enable  people  of  all  the  lower  classes  to  attain  the
highest perfection of life. This is possible only when one takes shelter of Kåñëa.
As indicated here by the word vyapäçritya, one has to take shelter completely
of Kåñëa. Then one can become much greater than great jïänés and yogés.

TEXT  33

ik&- PauNab]aRø<aa" Pau<Yaa >a¢-a raJazRYaSTaQaa )

AiNaTYaMaSau%& l/aek-iMaMa& Pa[aPYa >aJaSv MaaMa( )) 33 ))

kià punar brähmaëäù puëyä
bhaktä räjarñayas tathä
anityam asukhaà lokam
imaà präpya bhajasva mäm

SYNONYMS

kim—how much; punaù—again; brähmaëäù—brähmaëas; puëyäù—righteous;
bhaktäù—devotees; räja-åñayaù—saintly kings; tathä—also;
anityam—temporary; asukham—full of miseries; lokam—planet; imam—this;
präpya—gaining; bhajasva—be engaged in loving service; mäm—unto Me.

TRANSLATION

How much more this is so of the righteous brähmaëas, the devotees and the

saintly kings. Therefore, having come to this temporary, miserable world,
engage in loving service unto Me.

PURPORT

In this material world there are classifications of people, but, after all, this
world  is  not  a  happy  place  for  anyone.  It  is  clearly  stated  here,  anityam
asukhaà lokam: this world is temporary and full of miseries, not habitable for
any  sane  gentleman.  This  world  is  declared  by  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead  to  be  temporary  and  full  of  miseries.  Some  philosophers,  especially
Mäyävädé philosophers, say that this world is false, but we can understand from
Bhagavad-gétä that the world is not false; it is temporary. There is a difference
between  temporary  and  false.  This  world  is  temporary,  but  there  is  another
world, which is eternal. This world is miserable, but the other world is eternal
and blissful.

Arjuna was born in a saintly royal family. To him also the Lord says, “Take
to My devotional service and come quickly back to Godhead, back home.” No
one should remain in this temporary world, full as it is with miseries. Everyone
should attach himself to the bosom of the Supreme Personality of Godhead so
that he can be eternally happy. The devotional service of the Supreme Lord is
the  only  process  by  which  all  problems  of  all  classes  of  men  can  be  solved.
Everyone  should  therefore  take  to  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  make  his  life
perfect.

TEXT  34

MaNMaNaa >av MaÙ¢-ae MaÛaJaq Maa& NaMaSku-å )

MaaMaevEZYaiSa Yau¤E-vMaaTMaaNa& MaTParaYa<a" )) 34 ))

man-manä bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
mäm evaiñyasi yuktvaivam
ätmänaà mat-paräyaëaù

SYNONYMS

mat-manäù—always thinking of Me; bhava—become; mat—My;
bhaktaù—devotee; mat—My; yäjé—worshiper; mäm—unto Me;
namaskuru—offer obeisances; mäm—unto Me; eva—completely; eñyasi—you
will come; yuktvä—being absorbed; evam—thus; ätmänam—your soul;
mat-paräyaëaù—devoted to Me.

TRANSLATION

Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer

obeisances to Me and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you
will come to Me.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  it  is  clearly  indicated  that  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  the  only
means  of  being  delivered  from  the  clutches  of  this  contaminated  material
world.  Sometimes  unscrupulous  commentators distort the meaning of what is
clearly  stated  here:  that  all  devotional  service  should  be  offered  to  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa.  Unfortunately,  unscrupulous
commentators divert the mind of the reader to that which is not at all feasible.
Such commentators do not know that there is no difference between Kåñëa’s
mind and Kåñëa. Kåñëa is not an ordinary human being; He is Absolute Truth.
His  body,  His  mind  and  He  Himself  are  one  and  absolute.  It  is  stated  in  the
Kürma  Puräëa.  as  it  is  quoted  by  Bhaktisiddhänta  Sarasvaté  Gosvämé  in  his
Anubhäñya  comments  on  Caitanya-caritämåta  (Fifth  Chapter,  Ädi-lélä,  verses
41–48), deha-dehi-vibhedo ’yaà neçvare vidyate kvacit. This means that there is
no difference in Kåñëa, the Supreme Lord, between Himself and His body. But
because the commentators do not know this science of Kåñëa, they hide Kåñëa

and divide His personality from His mind or from His body. Although this is
sheer  ignorance  of  the  science  of  Kåñëa,  some  men  make  profit  out  of
misleading people.

There are some who are demonic; they also think of Kåñëa, but enviously,
just like King Kaàsa, Kåñëa’s uncle. He was also thinking of Kåñëa always, but
he thought of Kåñëa as his enemy. He was always in anxiety, wondering when
Kåñëa  would  come  to  kill  him.  That  kind  of  thinking  will  not  help  us.  One
should  be  thinking  of  Kåñëa  in  devotional  love.  That  is  bhakti.  One  should
cultivate  the  knowledge  of  Kåñëa  continuously.  What  is  that  favorable
cultivation?  It  is  to  learn  from  a  bona  fide  teacher.  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and we have several times explained that His body is
not material, but is eternal, blissful knowledge. This kind of talk about Kåñëa
will  help  one  become  a  devotee.  Understanding  Kåñëa  otherwise,  from  the
wrong source, will prove fruitless.

One should therefore engage his mind in the eternal form, the primal form
of  Kåñëa;  with  conviction  in  his  heart  that  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme,  he  should
engage  himself  in  worship.  There  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of  temples  in
India  for  the  worship  of  Kåñëa,  and  devotional  service  is  practiced  there.
When such practice is made, one has to offer obeisances to Kåñëa. One should
lower  his  head  before  the  Deity  and  engage  his  mind,  his  body,  his
activities—everything.  That  will  make  one  fully  absorbed  in  Kåñëa  without
deviation.  This  will  help  one  transfer  to  the  Kåñëaloka.  One  should  not  be
deviated  by  unscrupulous  commentators.  One  must  engage  in  the  nine
different processes of devotional service, beginning with hearing and chanting
about  Kåñëa.  Pure  devotional  service  is  the  highest  achievement  of  human
society.

The  Seventh  and  Eighth  chapters  of  Bhagavad-gétä  have  explained  pure
devotional service to the Lord that is free from speculative knowledge, mystic
yoga  and  fruitive  activities.  Those  who  are  not  purely  sanctified  may  be
attracted by different features of the Lord like the impersonal brahmajyoti and
localized  Paramätmä,  but  a  pure  devotee  directly  takes  to  the  service  of  the
Supreme Lord.

There is a beautiful poem about Kåñëa in which it is clearly stated that any

person  who  is  engaged  in  the  worship  of  demigods  is  most  unintelligent  and
cannot achieve at any time the supreme award of Kåñëa. The devotee, in the
beginning,  may  sometimes  fall  from  the  standard,  but  still  he  should  be
considered  superior  to  all  other  philosophers  and  yogés.  One  who  always
engages in Kåñëa consciousness should be understood to be a perfectly saintly
person. His accidental nondevotional activities will diminish, and he will soon
be situated without any doubt in complete perfection. The pure devotee has no
actual  chance  to  fall  down,  because  the  Supreme  Godhead  personally  takes
care  of  His  pure  devotees.  Therefore,  the  intelligent  person  should  take
directly to the process of Kåñëa consciousness and happily live in this material
world. He will eventually receive the supreme award of Kåñëa.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Ninth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of the Most Confidential Knowledge.

- CHAPTER 10 -
The Opulence of the Absolute

TEXT  1

é[q>aGavaNauvac

>aUYa Wv Mahabahae é*<au Mae ParMa& vc" )

Yatae_h& Pa[qYaMaa<aaYa v+YaaiMa ihTak-aMYaYaa )) 1 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
bhüya eva mahä-bäho
çåëu me paramaà vacaù

yat te ’haà préyamäëäya
vakñyämi hita-kämyayä

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
bhüyaù—again; eva—certainly; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed; çåëu—just
hear; me—My; paramam—supreme; vacaù—instruction; yat—that which;
te—to you; aham—I; préyamäëäya—thinking you dear to Me; vakñyämi—say;
hita-kämyayä—for your benefit.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Listen again, O mighty-armed
Arjuna. Because you are My dear friend, for your benefit I shall speak to you
further, giving knowledge that is better than what I have already explained.

PURPORT

The word bhagavän is explained thus by Paräçara Muni: one who is full in
six opulences, who has full strength, full fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty and
renunciation,  is  Bhagavän,  or  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  While
Kåñëa  was  present  on  this  earth,  He  displayed  all  six  opulences.  Therefore
great  sages  like  Paräçara  Muni  have  all  accepted  Kåñëa  as  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Now Kåñëa is instructing Arjuna in more confidential
knowledge  of  His  opulences  and  His  work.  Previously,  beginning  with  the
Seventh  Chapter,  the  Lord  has  already  explained  His  different  energies  and
how they are acting. Now in this chapter He explains His specific opulences to
Arjuna.  In  the  previous  chapter  He  has  clearly  explained  His  different
energies  to  establish  devotion  in  firm  conviction.  Again  in  this  chapter  He
tells Arjuna about His manifestations and various opulences.

The more one hears about the Supreme God, the more one becomes fixed
in  devotional  service.  One  should  always  hear  about  the  Lord  in  the
association of devotees; that will enhance one’s devotional service. Discourses

in  the  society  of  devotees  can  take  place  only  among  those  who  are  really
anxious  to  be  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Others  cannot  take  part  in  such
discourses.  The  Lord  clearly  tells  Arjuna  that  because  Arjuna  is  very  dear  to
Him, for his benefit such discourses are taking place.

TEXT  2

Na Mae ivdu" SaurGa<aa" Pa[>av& Na MahzRYa" )

AhMaaidihR devaNaa& Mahzs<aa& c SavRXa" )) 2 ))

na me viduù sura-gaëäù
prabhavaà na maharñayaù
aham ädir hi devänäà
maharñéëäà ca sarvaçaù

SYNONYMS

na—never; me—My; viduù—know; sura-gaëäù—the demigods;
prabhavam—origin, opulences; na—never; mahä-åñayaù—great sages; aham—I
am; ädiù—the origin; hi—certainly; devänäm—of the demigods;
mahä-åñéëäm—of the great sages; ca—also; sarvaçaù—in all respects.

TRANSLATION

Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin or
opulences, for, in every respect, I am the source of the demigods and sages.

PURPORT

As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord. No one
is greater than Him; He is the cause of all causes. Here it is also stated by the
Lord  personally  that  He  is  the  cause  of  all  the  demigods  and  sages.  Even  the
demigods  and  great  sages  cannot  understand  Kåñëa;  they  can  understand
neither His name nor His personality, so what is the position of the so-called

scholars  of  this  tiny  planet?  No  one  can  understand  why  this  Supreme  God
comes  to  earth  as  an  ordinary  human  being  and  executes  such  wonderful,
uncommon  activities.  One  should  know,  then,  that  scholarship  is  not  the
qualification necessary to understand Kåñëa. Even the demigods and the great
sages  have  tried  to  understand  Kåñëa  by  their  mental  speculation,  and  they
have failed to do so. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam also it is clearly said that even
the  great  demigods  are  not  able  to  understand  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead.  They  can  speculate  to  the  limits  of  their  imperfect  senses  and  can
reach the opposite conclusion of impersonalism, of something not manifested
by  the  three  qualities  of  material  nature,  or  they  can  imagine  something  by
mental speculation, but it is not possible to understand Kåñëa by such foolish
speculation.

Here  the  Lord  indirectly  says  that  if  anyone  wants  to  know  the  Absolute
Truth,  “Here  I  am  present  as  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  I  am  the
Supreme.”  One  should  know  this.  Although  one  cannot  understand  the
inconceivable  Lord  who  is  personally  present,  He  nonetheless  exists. We  can
actually understand Kåñëa, who is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge, simply
by  studying  His  words  in  Bhagavad-gétä  and  Çrémad-Bhägavatam.  The
conception of God as some ruling power or as the impersonal Brahman can be
reached  by  persons  who  are  in  the  inferior  energy  of  the  Lord,  but  the
Personality  of  Godhead  cannot  be  conceived  unless  one 
in  the
transcendental position.

is 

Because most men cannot understand Kåñëa in His actual situation, out of
His causeless mercy He descends to show favor to such speculators. Yet despite
the  Supreme  Lord’s  uncommon  activities,  these  speculators,  due  to
contamination in the material energy, still think that the impersonal Brahman
is the Supreme. Only the devotees who are fully surrendered unto the Supreme
Lord  can  understand,  by  the  grace  of  the  Supreme  Personality,  that  He  is
Kåñëa. The devotees of the Lord do not bother about the impersonal Brahman
conception  of  God;  their  faith  and  devotion  bring  them  to  surrender
immediately unto the Supreme Lord, and out of the causeless mercy of Kåñëa
they  can  understand  Kåñëa.  No  one  else  can  understand  Him.  So  even  great
sages  agree:  What  is  ätmä,  what  is  the  Supreme?  It  is  He  whom  we  have  to

worship.

TEXT  3

Yaae MaaMaJaMaNaaid& c veita l/aek-MaheìrMa( )

ASaMMaU!" Sa MaTYaeRzu SavRPaaPaE" Pa[MauCYaTae )) 3 ))

yo mäm ajam anädià ca
vetti loka-maheçvaram
asammüòhaù sa martyeñu
sarva-päpaiù pramucyate

SYNONYMS

yaù—anyone who; mäm—Me; ajam—unborn; anädim—without beginning;
ca—also; vetti—knows; loka—of the planets; mahä-éçvaram—the supreme
master; asammüòhaù—undeluded; saù—he; martyeñu—among those subject to
death; sarva-päpaiù—from all sinful reactions; pramucyate—is delivered.

TRANSLATION

He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme Lord

of all the worlds—he only, undeluded among men, is freed from all sins.

PURPORT

As stated in the Seventh Chapter (7.3), manuñyäëäà sahasreñu kaçcid yatati
siddhaye:  those  who  are  trying  to  elevate  themselves  to  the  platform  of
spiritual  realization  are  not  ordinary  men;  they  are  superior  to  millions  and
millions of ordinary men who have no knowledge of spiritual realization. But
out  of  those  actually  trying  to  understand  their  spiritual  situation,  one  who
can  come  to  the  understanding  that  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  the  proprietor  of  everything,  the  unborn,  is  the  most  successful
spiritually  realized  person.  In  that  stage  only,  when  one  has  fully  understood

Kåñëa’s supreme position, can one be free completely from all sinful reactions.

Here  the  Lord  is  described  by  the  word  aja,  meaning  “unborn,”  but  He  is
distinct  from  the  living  entities  who  are  described  in  the  Second  Chapter  as
aja.  The  Lord  is  different  from  the  living  entities  who  are  taking  birth  and
dying  due  to  material  attachment.  The  conditioned  souls  are  changing  their
bodies, but His body is not changeable. Even when He comes to this material
world, He comes as the same unborn; therefore in the Fourth Chapter it is said
that  the  Lord,  by  His  internal  potency,  is  not  under  the  inferior,  material
energy, but is always in the superior energy.

In this verse the words vetti loka-maheçvaram indicate that one should know
that  Lord  Kåñëa  is  the  supreme  proprietor  of  the  planetary  systems  of  the
universe.  He  was  existing  before  the  creation,  and  He  is  different  from  His
creation. All the demigods were created within this material world, but as far
as  Kåñëa  is  concerned,  it  is  said  that  He  is  not  created;  therefore  Kåñëa  is
different even from the great demigods like Brahmä and Çiva. And because He
is the creator of Brahmä, Çiva and all the other demigods, He is the Supreme
Person of all planets.

Çré Kåñëa is therefore different from everything that is created, and anyone
who  knows  Him  as  such  immediately  becomes  liberated  from  all  sinful
reactions.  One  must  be  liberated  from  all  sinful  activities  to  be  in  the
knowledge of the Supreme Lord. Only by devotional service can He be known
and not by any other means, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä.

One  should  not  try  to  understand  Kåñëa  as  a  human  being.  As  stated
previously, only a foolish person thinks Him to be a human being. This is again
expressed here in a different way. A man who is not foolish, who is intelligent
enough  to  understand  the  constitutional  position  of  the  Godhead,  is  always
free from all sinful reactions.

If Kåñëa is known as the son of Devaké, then how can He be unborn? That
is  also  explained  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam:  When  He  appeared  before  Devaké
and  Vasudeva,  He  was  not  born  as  an  ordinary  child;  He  appeared  in  His
original form, and then He transformed Himself into an ordinary child.

Anything done under the direction of Kåñëa is transcendental. It cannot be
contaminated by material reactions, which may be auspicious or inauspicious.

scriptures 

in  authoritative 

The  conception  that  there  are  things  auspicious  and  inauspicious  in  the
material  world  is  more  or  less  a  mental  concoction  because  there  is  nothing
auspicious  in  the  material  world.  Everything  is  inauspicious  because  the  very
material  nature  is  inauspicious.  We  simply  imagine  it  to  be  auspicious.  Real
auspiciousness  depends  on  activities  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  in  full  devotion
and service. Therefore if we at all want our activities to be auspicious, then we
should  work  under  the  directions  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Such  directions  are
given 
such  as  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  and
Bhagavad-gétä,  or  from  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master.  Because  the  spiritual
master is the representative of the Supreme Lord, his direction is directly the
direction  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  spiritual  master,  saintly  persons  and
scriptures  direct  in  the  same  way.  There  is  no  contradiction  in  these  three
sources.  All  actions  done  under  such  direction  are  free  from  the  reactions  of
pious or impious activities of this material world. The transcendental attitude
of the devotee in the performance of activities is actually that of renunciation,
and this is called sannyäsa. As stated in the first verse of the Sixth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gétä, one who acts as a matter of duty because he has been ordered to
do so by the Supreme Lord, and who does not seek shelter in the fruits of his
activities (anäçritaù karma-phalam), is a true renouncer. Anyone acting under
the direction of the Supreme Lord is actually a sannyäsé and a yogé, and not the
man who has simply taken the dress of the sannyäsé, or a pseudo yogé.

TEXTS  4–5

buiÖjaRNaMaSaMMaaeh" +aMaa SaTYa& dMa" XaMa" )

Sau%& du"%& >avae_>aavae >aYa& ca>aYaMaev c )) 4 ))

Aih&Saa SaMaTaa TauiíSTaPaae daNa& YaXaae_YaXa" )

>aviNTa >aava >aUTaaNaa& Mata Wv Pa*QaiGvDaa" )) 5 ))

buddhir jïänam asammohaù
kñamä satyaà damaù çamaù
sukhaà duùkhaà bhavo ’bhävo

bhayaà cäbhayam eva ca

ahiàsä samatä tuñöis
tapo dänaà yaço ’yaçaù
bhavanti bhävä bhütänäà
matta eva påthag-vidhäù

SYNONYMS

buddhiù—intelligence; jïänam—knowledge; asammohaù—freedom from
doubt; kñamä—forgiveness; satyam—truthfulness; damaù—control of the
senses; çamaù—control of the mind; sukham—happiness; duùkham—distress;
bhavaù—birth; abhävaù—death; bhayam—fear; ca—also;
abhayam—fearlessness; eva—also; ca—and; ahiàsä—nonviolence;
samatä—equilibrium; tuñöiù—satisfaction; tapaù—penance; dänam—charity;
yaçaù—fame; ayaçaù—infamy; bhavanti—come about; bhäväù—natures;
bhütänäm—of living entities; mattaù—from Me; eva—certainly;
påthak-vidhäù—variously arranged.

TRANSLATION

Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness,
truthfulness, control of the senses, control of the mind, happiness and distress,
birth, death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity,
charity, fame and infamy—all these various qualities of living beings are created
by Me alone.

PURPORT

The different qualities of living entities, be they good or bad, are all created

by Kåñëa, and they are described here.

Intelligence  refers  to  the  power  to  analyze  things  in  their  proper
perspective, and knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit and what is
matter. Ordinary knowledge obtained by a university education pertains only
to  matter,  and  it  is  not  accepted  here  as  knowledge.  Knowledge  means

knowing the distinction between spirit and matter. In modern education there
is  no  knowledge  about  spirit;  they  are  simply  taking  care  of  the  material
elements and bodily needs. Therefore academic knowledge is not complete.

Asammoha, freedom from doubt and delusion, can be achieved when one is
not hesitant and when he understands the transcendental philosophy. Slowly
but  surely  he  becomes  free  from  bewilderment.  Nothing  should  be  accepted
blindly;  everything  should  be  accepted  with  care  and  with  caution.  Kñamä,
tolerance  and  forgiveness,  should  be  practiced;  one  should  be  tolerant  and
excuse  the  minor  offenses  of  others.  Satyam,  truthfulness,  means  that  facts
should be presented as they are, for the benefit of others. Facts should not be
misrepresented. According to social conventions, it is said that one can speak
the truth only when it is palatable to others. But that is not truthfulness. The
truth should be spoken in a straightforward way, so that others will understand
actually what the facts are. If a man is a thief and if people are warned that he
is  a  thief,  that  is  truth.  Although  sometimes  the  truth  is  unpalatable,  one
should  not  refrain  from  speaking  it.  Truthfulness  demands  that  the  facts  be
presented as they are for the benefit of others. That is the definition of truth.

Control  of  the  senses  means  that  the  senses  should  not  be  used  for
unnecessary personal enjoyment. There is no prohibition against meeting the
proper needs of the senses, but unnecessary sense enjoyment is detrimental for
spiritual  advancement.  Therefore  the  senses  should  be  restrained  from
unnecessary  use.  Similarly,  one  should  restrain  the  mind  from  unnecessary
thoughts; that is called çama. One should not spend one’s time pondering over
earning  money.  That  is  a  misuse  of  the  thinking  power.  The  mind  should  be
used  to  understand  the  prime  necessity  of  human  beings,  and  that  should  be
presented  authoritatively.  The  power  of  thought  should  be  developed  in
association with persons who are authorities in the scriptures, saintly persons
and  spiritual  masters  and  those  whose  thinking  is  highly  developed.  Sukham,
pleasure  or  happiness,  should  always  be  in  that  which  is  favorable  for  the
cultivation  of  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  And  similarly,
that which is painful or which causes distress is that which is unfavorable for
the  cultivation  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Anything  favorable  for  the
development  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  should  be  accepted,  and  anything

unfavorable should be rejected.

Bhava, birth, should be understood to refer to the body. As far as the soul is
concerned,  there  is  neither  birth  nor  death;  that  we  have  discussed  in  the
beginning of Bhagavad-gétä. Birth and death apply to one’s embodiment in the
material  world.  Fear  is  due  to  worrying  about  the  future.  A  person  in  Kåñëa
consciousness has no fear because by his activities he is sure to go back to the
spiritual sky, back home, back to Godhead. Therefore his future is very bright.
Others,  however,  do  not  know  what  their  future  holds;  they  have  no
knowledge  of  what  the  next  life  holds.  So  they  are  therefore  in  constant
anxiety.  If  we  want  to  get  free  from  anxiety,  then  the  best  course  is  to
understand Kåñëa and be situated always in Kåñëa consciousness. In that way
we  will  be  free  from  all  fear.  In  the Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (11.2.37)  it  is  stated,
bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät: fear is caused by our absorption in the illusory
energy.  But  those  who  are  free  from  the  illusory  energy,  those  who  are
confident that they are not the material body, that they are spiritual parts of
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  who  are  therefore  engaged  in  the
transcendental  service  of  the  Supreme Godhead, have nothing to fear. Their
future is very bright. This fear is a condition of persons who are not in Kåñëa
consciousness.  Abhayam,  fearlessness,  is  possible  only  for  one  in  Kåñëa
consciousness.

Ahiàsä,  nonviolence,  means  that  one  should  not  do  anything  which  will
put others into misery or confusion. Material activities that are promised by so
many  politicians,  sociologists,  philanthropists,  etc.,  do  not  produce  very  good
results  because  the  politicians  and  philanthropists  have  no  transcendental
vision; they do not know what is actually beneficial for human society. Ahiàsä
means that people should be trained in such a way that the full utilization of
the  human  body  can  be  achieved.  The  human  body  is  meant  for  spiritual
realization,  so  any  movement  or  any  commissions  which  do  not  further  that
end  commit  violence  on  the  human  body.  That  which  furthers  the  future
spiritual happiness of the people in general is called nonviolence.

Samatä, equanimity, refers to freedom from attachment and aversion. To be
very much attached or to be very much detached is not the best. This material
world  should  be  accepted  without  attachment  or  aversion.  That  which  is

favorable for prosecuting Kåñëa consciousness should be accepted; that which
is unfavorable should be rejected. That is called samatä, equanimity. A person
in  Kåñëa  consciousness  has  nothing  to  reject  and  nothing  to  accept  save  in
terms of its usefulness in the prosecution of Kåñëa consciousness.

Tuñöi, satisfaction, means that one should not be eager to gather more and
more  material  goods  by  unnecessary  activity.  One  should  be  satisfied  with
whatever  is  obtained  by  the  grace  of  the  Supreme  Lord;  that  is  called
satisfaction.  Tapas  means  austerity  or  penance.  There  are  many  rules  and
regulations in the Vedas which apply here, like rising early in the morning and
taking  a  bath.  Sometimes  it  is  very  troublesome  to  rise  early  in  the  morning,
but  whatever  voluntary  trouble  one  may  suffer  in this way  is  called penance.
Similarly, there are prescriptions for fasting on certain days of the month. One
may not be inclined to practice such fasting, but because of his determination
to make advancement in the science of Kåñëa consciousness, he should accept
such  bodily  troubles  when  they  are  recommended.  However,  one  should  not
fast unnecessarily or against Vedic injunctions. One should not fast for some
political  purpose;  that  is  described  in  Bhagavad-gétä  as  fasting  in  ignorance,
and  anything  done  in  ignorance  or  passion  does  not  lead  to  spiritual
advancement.  Everything  done  in  the  mode  of  goodness  does  advance  one,
however, and fasting done in terms of the Vedic injunctions enriches one in
spiritual knowledge.

As far as charity is concerned, one should give fifty percent of his earnings
to some good cause. And what is a good cause? It is that which is conducted in
terms of Kåñëa consciousness. That is not only a good cause, but the best cause.
Because Kåñëa is good, His cause is also good. Thus charity should be given to a
person who is engaged in Kåñëa consciousness. According to Vedic literature,
it  is  enjoined  that  charity  should  be  given  to  the brähmaëas.  This  practice  is
still followed, although not very nicely in terms of the Vedic injunction. But
still  the  injunction  is  that  charity  should  be  given  to  the  brähmaëas.  Why?
Because  they  are  engaged  in  higher  cultivation  of  spiritual  knowledge.  A
brähmaëa  is  supposed  to  devote  his  whole  life  to  understanding  Brahman.
Brahma  jänätéti  brähmaëaù:  one  who  knows  Brahman  is  called  a  brähmaëa.
Thus  charity  is  offered  to  the  brähmaëas  because  they  are  always  engaged  in

higher spiritual service and have no time to earn their livelihood. In the Vedic
literature, charity is also to be awarded to one in the renounced order of life,
the  sannyäsé.  The  sannyäsés  beg  from  door  to  door,  not  for  money  but  for
missionary purposes. The system is that they go from door to door to awaken
the householders from the slumber of ignorance. Because the householders are
engaged  in  family  affairs  and  have  forgotten  their  actual  purpose  in
life—awakening their Kåñëa consciousness—it is the business of the sannyäsés
to  go  as  beggars  to  the  householders  and  encourage  them  to  be  Kåñëa
conscious. As it is said in the Vedas, one should awake and achieve what is due
him in this human form of life. This knowledge and method is distributed by
the  sannyäsés;  hence  charity  is  to  be  given  to  the  renouncer  of  life,  to  the
brähmaëas, and similar good causes, not to any whimsical cause.

Yaças, fame, should be according to Lord Caitanya, who said that a man is
famous  when  he  is  known  as  a  great  devotee.  That  is  real  fame.  If  one  has
become a great man in Kåñëa consciousness and it is known, then he is truly
famous. One who does not have such fame is infamous.

All  these  qualities  are  manifest  throughout the universe in human society
and  in  the  society  of  the  demigods.  There  are  many  forms  of  humanity  on
other  planets,  and  these  qualities  are  there.  Now,  for  one  who  wants  to
advance  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  Kåñëa  creates  all  these  qualities,  but  the
person develops them himself from within. One who engages in the devotional
service of the Supreme Lord develops all the good qualities, as arranged by the
Supreme Lord.

Of  whatever  we  find,  good  or  bad,  the  origin  is  Kåñëa.  Nothing  can
manifest itself in this material world which is not in Kåñëa. That is knowledge;
although  we  know  that  things  are  differently  situated,  we  should  realize  that
everything flows from Kåñëa.

TEXT  6

MahzRYa" Saá PaUveR cTvarae MaNavSTaQaa )

MaÙava MaaNaSaa JaaTaa Yaeza& l/aek- wMaa" Pa[Jaa" )) 6 ))

maharñayaù sapta pürve
catväro manavas tathä
mad-bhävä mänasä jätä
yeñäà loka imäù prajäù

SYNONYMS

mahä-åñayaù—the great sages; sapta—seven; pürve—before; catväraù—four;
manavaù—Manus; tathä—also; mat-bhäväù—born of Me; mänasäù—from the
mind; jätäù—born; yeñäm—of them; loke—in the world; imäù—all this;
prajäù—population.

TRANSLATION

The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and the
Manus [progenitors of mankind] come from Me, born from My mind, and all
the living beings populating the various planets descend from them.

PURPORT

The  Lord  is  giving  a  genealogical  synopsis  of  the  universal  population.
Brahmä  is  the  original  creature  born  out  of  the  energy  of  the  Supreme  Lord,
who is known as Hiraëyagarbha. And from Brahmä all the seven great sages,
and before them four other great sages, named Sanaka, Sananda, Sanätana and
Sanat-kumära,  and  the  Manus,  are  manifested.  All  these  twenty-five  great
sages  are  known  as  the  patriarchs  of  the  living  entities  all  over  the  universe.
There  are  innumerable  universes  and  innumerable  planets  within  each
universe,  and  each  planet  is  full  of  population  of  different  varieties.  All  of
them are born of these twenty-five patriarchs. Brahmä underwent penance for
one  thousand  years  of  the  demigods  before  he  realized  by  the  grace  of  Kåñëa
how  to  create.  Then  from  Brahmä  came  Sanaka,  Sananda,  Sanätana  and
Sanat-kumära,  then  Rudra,  and  then  the  seven sages, and in this way all the
brähmaëas and kñatriyas are born out of the energy of the Supreme Personality
of  Godhead.  Brahmä  is  known  as  Pitämaha,  the  grandfather,  and  Kåñëa  is

known  as  Prapitämaha,  the  father  of  the  grandfather.  That  is  stated  in  the
Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä (11.39).

TEXT  7

WTaa& iv>aUiTa& YaaeGa& c MaMa Yaae veita TatvTa" )

Saae_ivk-LPaeNa YaaeGaeNa YauJYaTae Naa}a Sa&XaYa" )) 7 ))

etäà vibhütià yogaà ca
mama yo vetti tattvataù
so ’vikalpena yogena
yujyate nätra saàçayaù

SYNONYMS

etäm—all this; vibhütim—opulence; yogam—mystic power; ca—also;
mama—of Mine; yaù—anyone who; vetti—knows; tattvataù—factually;
saù—he; avikalpena—without division; yogena—in devotional service;
yujyate—is engaged; na—never; atra—here; saàçayaù—doubt.

TRANSLATION

One who is factually convinced of this opulence and mystic power of Mine

engages in unalloyed devotional service; of this there is no doubt.

PURPORT

The  highest  summit  of  spiritual  perfection  is  knowledge  of  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  Unless  one  is  firmly  convinced  of  the  different
opulences  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  he  cannot  engage  in  devotional  service.
Generally people know that God is great, but they do not know in detail how
God  is  great.  Here  are  the  details.  If  one  knows  factually  how  God  is  great,
then  naturally  he  becomes  a  surrendered  soul  and  engages  himself  in  the
devotional service of the Lord. When one factually knows the opulences of the

Supreme,  there  is  no  alternative  but  to  surrender  to  Him.  This  factual
knowledge  can  be  known  from  the  descriptions  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  and
Bhagavad-gétä and similar literatures.

In the administration of this universe there are many demigods distributed
throughout the planetary system, and the chief of them are Brahmä, Lord Çiva
and  the  four  great  Kumäras  and  the  other  patriarchs.  There  are  many
forefathers of the population of the universe, and all of them are born of the
Supreme  Lord,  Kåñëa.  The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  is  the
original forefather of all forefathers.

These are some of the opulences of the Supreme Lord. When one is firmly
convinced of them, he accepts Kåñëa with great faith and without any doubt,
and he engages in devotional service. All this particular knowledge is required
in order to increase one’s interest in the loving devotional service of the Lord.
One should not neglect to understand fully how great Kåñëa is, for by knowing
the  greatness  of  Kåñëa  one  will  be  able  to  be  fixed  in  sincere  devotional
service.

TEXT  8

Ah& SavRSYa Pa[>avae Mata" Sav| Pa[vTaRTae )

wiTa MaTva >aJaNTae Maa& buDaa >aavSaMaiNvTaa" )) 8 ))

ahaà sarvasya prabhavo
mattaù sarvaà pravartate
iti matvä bhajante mäà
budhä bhäva-samanvitäù

SYNONYMS

aham—I; sarvasya—of all; prabhavaù—the source of generation;
mattaù—from Me; sarvam—everything; pravartate—emanates; iti—thus;
matvä—knowing; bhajante—become devoted; mäm—unto Me; budhäù—the
learned; bhäva-samanvitäù—with great attention.

TRANSLATION

I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates
from Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in My devotional service
and worship Me with all their hearts.

PURPORT

A learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly and has information
from  authorities  like  Lord  Caitanya  and  who  knows  how  to  apply  these
teachings  can  understand  that  Kåñëa  is  the  origin  of  everything  in  both  the
material and spiritual worlds, and because he knows this perfectly he becomes
firmly  fixed  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  He  can  never  be
deviated  by  any  amount  of  nonsensical  commentaries  or  by  fools.  All  Vedic
literature  agrees  that  Kåñëa  is  the  source  of  Brahmä,  Çiva  and  all  other
demigods.  In  the  Atharva  Veda  (Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad  1.24)  it  is  said,  yo
brahmäëaà  vidadhäti  pürvaà  yo  vai  vedäàç  ca  gäpayati  sma  kåñëaù:  “It  was
Kåñëa who in the beginning instructed Brahmä in Vedic knowledge and who
disseminated  Vedic  knowledge  in  the  past.”  Then  again  the  Näräyaëa
Upaniñad (1) says, atha puruño ha vai näräyaëo ’kämayata prajäù såjeyeti: “Then
the  Supreme  Personality  Näräyaëa  desired  to  create  living  entities.”  The
Upaniñad continues, näräyaëäd brahmä jäyate, näräyaëäd prajäpatiù prajäyate,
näräyaëäd  indro  jäyate,  näräyaëäd  añöau  vasavo  jäyante,  näräyaëäd  ekädaça
rudrä jäyante, näräyaëäd dvädaçädityäù: “From Näräyaëa, Brahmä is born, and
from  Näräyaëa  the  patriarchs  are  also  born.  From  Näräyaëa,  Indra  is  born,
from Näräyaëa the eight Vasus are born, from Näräyaëa the eleven Rudras are
born,  from  Näräyaëa  the  twelve  Ädityas  are  born.”  This  Näräyaëa  is  an
expansion of Kåñëa.

It is said in the same Vedas, brahmaëyo devaké-putraù: “The son of Devaké,
Kåñëa, is the Supreme Personality.” (Näräyaëa Upaniñad 4) Then it is said, eko
vai näräyaëa äsén na brahmä na éçäno näpo nägni-samau neme dyäv-äpåthivé na
nakñaträëi  na  süryaù:  “In  the  beginning  of  the  creation  there  was  only  the
Supreme Personality Näräyaëa. There was no Brahmä, no Çiva, no water, no

fire,  no  moon,  no  stars  in  the  sky,  no  sun.”  (Mahä Upaniñad  1)  In  the  Mahä
Upaniñad  it  is  also  said  that  Lord  Çiva  was  born  from  the  forehead  of  the
Supreme Lord. Thus the Vedas say that it is the Supreme Lord, the creator of
Brahmä and Çiva, who is to be worshiped.
In the Mokña-dharma Kåñëa also says,

prajäpatià ca rudraà cäpy
aham eva såjämi vai
tau hi mäà na vijänéto
mama mäyä-vimohitau

“The  patriarchs,  Çiva  and  others  are  created  by  Me,  though  they  do  not
know  that  they  are  created  by  Me  because  they  are  deluded  by  My  illusory
energy.” In the Varäha Puräëa it is also said,

näräyaëaù paro devas
tasmäj jätaç caturmukhaù
tasmäd rudro ’bhavad devaù
sa ca sarva-jïatäà gataù

“Näräyaëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and from Him Brahmä

was born, from whom Çiva was born.”

Lord  Kåñëa  is  the  source  of  all  generations,  and  He  is  called  the  most
efficient cause of everything. He says, “Because everything is born of Me, I am
the original source of all. Everything is under Me; no one is above Me.” There
is  no  supreme  controller  other  than  Kåñëa.  One  who  understands  Kåñëa  in
such  a  way  from  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master,  with  references  from  Vedic
literature,  engages  all  his  energy  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  becomes  a  truly
learned  man.  In  comparison  to  him,  all  others,  who  do  not  know  Kåñëa
properly,  are  but  fools.  Only  a  fool  would  consider  Kåñëa  to  be  an  ordinary
man.  A  Kåñëa  conscious  person  should  not  be  bewildered  by  fools;  he  should
avoid all unauthorized commentaries and interpretations on Bhagavad-gétä and
proceed in Kåñëa consciousness with determination and firmness.

TEXT  9

MaiÀtaa MaÓTaPa[a<aa baeDaYaNTa" ParSParMa( )

k-QaYaNTaê Maa& iNaTYa& TauZYaiNTa c rMaiNTa c )) 9 ))

mac-cittä mad-gata-präëä
bodhayantaù parasparam
kathayantaç ca mäà nityaà
tuñyanti ca ramanti ca

SYNONYMS

mat-cittäù—their minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-präëäù—their lives
devoted to Me; bodhayantaù—preaching; parasparam—among themselves;
kathayantaù—talking; ca—also; mäm—about Me; nityam—perpetually;
tuñyanti—become pleased; ca—also; ramanti—enjoy transcendental bliss;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are fully devoted

to My service, and they derive great satisfaction and bliss from always
enlightening one another and conversing about Me.

PURPORT

Pure devotees, whose characteristics are mentioned here, engage themselves
fully in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Their minds cannot be
diverted  from  the  lotus  feet  of  Kåñëa.  Their  talks  are  solely  on  the
transcendental  subjects.  The  symptoms  of  the  pure  devotees  are  described  in
this  verse  specifically.  Devotees  of  the  Supreme  Lord  are  twenty-four  hours
daily  engaged  in  glorifying  the  qualities  and  pastimes  of  the  Supreme  Lord.
Their  hearts  and  souls  are  constantly  submerged  in  Kåñëa,  and  they  take
pleasure in discussing Him with other devotees.

In 

the  preliminary 

stage  of  devotional 

service 

they  relish 

the

transcendental  pleasure  from  the  service  itself,  and  in  the  mature  stage  they
are  actually  situated  in  love  of  God.  Once  situated  in  that  transcendental
position, they can relish the highest perfection which is exhibited by the Lord
in  His  abode.  Lord  Caitanya  likens  transcendental  devotional  service  to  the
sowing of a seed in the heart of the living entity. There are innumerable living
entities traveling throughout the different planets of the universe, and out of
them there are a few who are fortunate enough to meet a pure devotee and get
the  chance  to  understand  devotional  service.  This  devotional  service  is  just
like a seed, and if it is sown in the heart of a living entity, and if he goes on
hearing and chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, that seed fructifies, just as the seed
of  a  tree  fructifies  with  regular  watering.  The  spiritual  plant  of  devotional
service  gradually  grows  and  grows  until  it  penetrates  the  covering  of  the
material  universe  and  enters  into  the  brahmajyoti  effulgence  in  the  spiritual
sky.  In  the  spiritual  sky  also  that  plant  grows  more  and  more  until  it  reaches
the highest planet, which is called Goloka Våndävana, the supreme planet of
Kåñëa.  Ultimately,  the  plant  takes  shelter  under  the  lotus  feet  of  Kåñëa  and
rests  there.  Gradually,  as  a  plant  grows  fruits  and  flowers,  that  plant  of
devotional service also produces fruits, and the watering process in the form of
chanting  and  hearing  goes  on.  This  plant  of  devotional  service  is  fully
described  in  the  Caitanya-caritämåta  (Madhya-lélä,  Chapter  Nineteen).  It  is
explained  there  that  when  the  complete  plant  takes  shelter  under  the  lotus
feet of the Supreme Lord, one becomes fully absorbed in love of God; then he
cannot  live  even  for  a  moment  without  being  in  contact  with  the  Supreme
Lord,  just  as  a  fish  cannot  live  without  water.  In  such  a  state,  the  devotee
actually attains the transcendental qualities in contact with the Supreme Lord.
The  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  is  also  full  of  such  narrations  about  the
relationship  between  the  Supreme  Lord  and  His  devotees;  therefore  the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  is  very  dear  to  the  devotees,  as  stated  in  the  Bhägavatam
itself (12.13.18). Çrémad-bhägavataà puräëam amalaà yad vaiñëavänäà priyam.
In  this  narration  there  is  nothing  about  material  activities,  economic
development, sense gratification or liberation. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the only
narration  in  which  the  transcendental  nature  of  the  Supreme  Lord  and  His

devotees is fully described. Thus the realized souls in Kåñëa consciousness take
continual  pleasure  in  hearing  such  transcendental literatures, just as a young
boy and girl take pleasure in association.

TEXT  10

Taeza& SaTaTaYau¢-aNaa& >aJaTaa& Pa[qiTaPaUvRk-Ma( )

ddaiMa buiÖYaaeGa& Ta& YaeNa MaaMauPaYaaiNTa Tae )) 10 ))

teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te

SYNONYMS

teñäm—unto them; satata-yuktänäm—always engaged; bhajatäm—in
rendering devotional service; préti-pürvakam—in loving ecstasy; dadämi—I
give; buddhi-yogam—real intelligence; tam—that; yena—by which;
mäm—unto Me; upayänti—come; te—they.

TRANSLATION

To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with love, I give the

understanding by which they can come to Me.

PURPORT

In this verse the word buddhi-yogam is very significant. We may remember
that  in  the  Second  Chapter  the  Lord,  instructing  Arjuna,  said  that  He  had
spoken to him of many things and that He would instruct him in the way of
buddhi-yoga.  Now  buddhi-yoga  is  explained.  Buddhi-yoga  itself  is  action  in
Kåñëa  consciousness;  that 
intelligence.  Buddhi  means
is  the  highest 
intelligence, and yoga means mystic activities or mystic elevation. When one

tries to go back home, back to Godhead, and takes fully to Kåñëa consciousness
in  devotional  service,  his  action  is  called  buddhi  yoga.  In  other  words,
buddhi-yoga  is  the  process  by  which  one  gets  out  of  the  entanglement  of  this
material  world.  The  ultimate  goal  of  progress  is  Kåñëa.  People  do  not  know
this; therefore the association of devotees and a bona fide spiritual master are
important.  One  should  know  that  the  goal  is  Kåñëa,  and  when  the  goal  is
assigned, then the path is slowly but progressively traversed, and the ultimate
goal is achieved.

When  a  person  knows  the  goal  of  life  but  is  addicted  to  the  fruits  of
activities,  he  is  acting  in  karma-yoga.  When  he  knows  that  the  goal  is  Kåñëa
but he takes pleasure in mental speculations to understand Kåñëa, he is acting
in  jïäna-yoga.  And  when  he  knows  the  goal  and  seeks  Kåñëa  completely  in
Kåñëa  consciousness  and  devotional  service,  he  is  acting  in  bhakti-yoga,  or
buddhi-yoga,  which  is  the  complete  yoga.  This  complete  yoga  is  the  highest
perfectional stage of life.

A  person  may  have  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master  and  may  be  attached  to  a
spiritual organization, but still, if he is not intelligent enough to make progress,
then Kåñëa from within gives him instructions so that he may ultimately come
to  Him  without  difficulty.  The  qualification  is  that  a  person  always  engage
himself in Kåñëa consciousness and with love and devotion render all kinds of
services. He should perform some sort of work for Kåñëa, and that work should
be  with  love.  If  a  devotee  is  not  intelligent  enough  to  make  progress  on  the
path  of  self-realization  but  is  sincere  and  devoted  to  the  activities  of
devotional  service,  the  Lord  gives  him  a  chance  to  make  progress  and
ultimately attain to Him.

TEXT  11

TaezaMaevaNauk-MPaaQaRMahMajaNaJa& TaMa" )

NaaXaYaaMYaaTMa>aavSQaae jaNadqPaeNa >aaSvTaa )) 11 ))

teñäm evänukampärtham
aham ajïäna-jaà tamaù

näçayämy ätma-bhäva-stho
jïäna-dépena bhäsvatä

SYNONYMS

teñäm—for them; eva—certainly; anukampä-artham—to show special mercy;
aham—I; ajïäna-jam—due to ignorance; tamaù—darkness; näçayämi—dispel;
ätma-bhäva—within their hearts; sthaù—situated; jïäna—of knowledge;
dépena—with the lamp; bhäsvatä—glowing.

TRANSLATION

To show them special mercy, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the

shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.

PURPORT

When  Lord  Caitanya  was  in  Benares  promulgating  the  chanting  of  Hare
Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,  Räma
Räma,  Hare  Hare,  thousands  of  people  were  following  Him.  Prakäçänanda
Sarasvaté,  a  very  influential  and  learned  scholar  in  Benares  at  that  time,
derided  Lord  Caitanya  for  being  a  sentimentalist.  Sometimes  philosophers
criticize the devotees because they think that most of the devotees are in the
darkness of ignorance and are philosophically naive sentimentalists. Actually
that  is  not  the  fact.  There  are  very,  very  learned  scholars  who  have  put
forward  the  philosophy  of  devotion.  But  even  if  a  devotee  does  not  take
advantage  of  their  literatures  or  of  his  spiritual master, if he is sincere in his
devotional  service  he  is  helped  by  Kåñëa  Himself  within  his  heart.  So  the
sincere devotee engaged in Kåñëa consciousness cannot be without knowledge.
The  only  qualification  is  that  one  carry  out  devotional  service  in  full  Kåñëa
consciousness.

The  modern  philosophers  think  that  without  discriminating  one  cannot
have  pure  knowledge.  For  them  this  answer  is  given  by  the  Supreme  Lord:
those  who  are  engaged  in  pure  devotional  service,  even  though  they  be

without  sufficient  education  and  even  without  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
Vedic principles, are still helped by the Supreme God, as stated in this verse.

The Lord tells Arjuna that basically there is no possibility of understanding
the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
simply by speculating, for the Supreme Truth is so great that it is not possible
to understand Him or to achieve Him simply by making a mental effort. Man
can go on speculating for several millions of years, and if he is not devoted, if
he is not a lover of the Supreme Truth, he will never understand Kåñëa, or the
Supreme  Truth.  Only  by  devotional  service  is  the  Supreme  Truth,  Kåñëa,
pleased, and by His inconceivable energy He can reveal Himself to the heart of
the  pure  devotee.  The  pure  devotee  always  has  Kåñëa  within  his  heart;  and
with the presence of Kåñëa, who is just like the sun, the darkness of ignorance
is at once dissipated. This is the special mercy rendered to the pure devotee by
Kåñëa.

Due  to  the  contamination  of  material  association,  through  many,  many
millions  of  births,  one’s  heart  is  always  covered  with  the  dust  of  materialism,
but when one engages in devotional service and constantly chants Hare Kåñëa,
the dust quickly clears, and one is elevated to the platform of pure knowledge.
The ultimate goal, Viñëu, can be attained only by this chant and by devotional
service, and not by mental speculation or argument. The pure devotee does not
have  to  worry  about  the  material  necessities  of  life;  he  need  not  be  anxious,
because when he removes the darkness from his heart, everything is provided
automatically  by  the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is  pleased  by  the  loving  devotional
service of the devotee. This is the essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä. By
studying Bhagavad-gétä, one can become a soul completely surrendered to the
Supreme  Lord  and  engage  himself  in  pure  devotional  service.  As  the  Lord
takes  charge,  one  becomes  completely  free  from  all  kinds  of  materialistic
endeavors.

TEXTS  12–13

AJauRNa ovac

Par& b]ø Par& DaaMa Paiv}a& ParMa& >avaNa( )

Pauåz& XaaìTa& idVYaMaaiddevMaJa& iv>auMa( )) 12 ))

AahuSTvaMa*zYa" SaveR devizRNaaRrdSTaQaa )

AiSaTaae devl/ae VYaaSa" SvYa& cEv b]vqiz Mae )) 13 ))

arjuna uväca
paraà brahma paraà dhäma
pavitraà paramaà bhavän
puruñaà çäçvataà divyam
ädi-devam ajaà vibhum

ähus tväm åñayaù sarve
devarñir näradas tathä
asito devalo vyäsaù
svayaà caiva bravéñi me

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; param—supreme; brahma—truth;
param—supreme; dhäma—sustenance; pavitram—pure; paramam—supreme;
bhavän—You; puruñam—personality; çäçvatam—original;
divyam—transcendental; ädi-devam—the original Lord; ajam—unborn;
vibhum—greatest; ähuù—say; tväm—of You; åñayaù—sages; sarve—all;
deva-åñiù—the sage among the demigods; näradaù—Närada; tathä—also;
asitaù—Asita; devalaù—Devala; vyäsaù—Vyäsa; svayam—personally;
ca—also; eva—certainly; bravéñé—You are explaining; me—unto me.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the ultimate
abode, the purest, the Absolute Truth. You are the eternal, transcendental,
original person, the unborn, the greatest. All the great sages such as Närada,
Asita, Devala and Vyäsa confirm this truth about You, and now You Yourself
are declaring it to me.

PURPORT

In  these  two  verses  the  Supreme  Lord  gives  a  chance  to  the  modern
philosopher,  for  here  it  is  clear  that  the  Supreme  is  different  from  the
individual soul. Arjuna, after hearing the essential four verses of Bhagavad-gétä
[BG.  10.8-11]  in  this  chapter,  became  completely  free  from  all  doubts  and
accepted  Kåñëa  as  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  He  at  once  boldly
declares, “You are paraà brahma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” And
previously Kåñëa stated that He is the originator of everything and everyone.
Every  demigod  and  every  human  being  is  dependent  on  Him.  Men  and
demigods,  out  of  ignorance,  think  that  they  are  absolute  and  independent  of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That ignorance is removed perfectly by
the  discharge  of  devotional  service.  This  has  already  been  explained  in  the
previous verse by the Lord. Now, by His grace, Arjuna is accepting Him as the
Supreme  Truth,  in  concordance  with  the  Vedic  injunction.  It  is  not  that
because Kåñëa is Arjuna’s intimate friend Arjuna is flattering Him by calling
Him  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the  Absolute  Truth.  Whatever
Arjuna says in these two verses is confirmed by Vedic truth. Vedic injunctions
affirm that only one who takes to devotional service to the Supreme Lord can
understand  Him,  whereas  others  cannot.  Each  and  every  word  of  this  verse
spoken by Arjuna is confirmed by Vedic injunction.

In the Kena Upaniñad it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is the rest for
everything, and Kåñëa has already explained that everything is resting on Him.
The Muëòaka Upaniñad confirms that the Supreme Lord, in whom everything
is resting, can be realized only by those who engage constantly in thinking of
Him.  This  constant  thinking  of  Kåñëa  is  smaraëam,  one  of  the  methods  of
devotional  service.  It  is  only  by  devotional  service  to  Kåñëa  that  one  can
understand his position and get rid of this material body.

In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is accepted as the purest of the pure. One
who understands that Kåñëa is the purest of the pure can become purified from
all sinful activities. One cannot be disinfected from sinful activities unless he
surrenders  unto  the  Supreme  Lord.  Arjuna’s  acceptance  of  Kåñëa  as  the
supreme  pure  complies  with  the  injunctions  of  Vedic  literature.  This  is  also

confirmed by great personalities, of whom Närada is the chief.

Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  one  should  always
meditate upon Him and enjoy one’s transcendental relationship with Him. He
is  the  supreme  existence.  He  is  free  from  bodily  needs,  birth  and  death.  Not
only does Arjuna confirm this, but all the Vedic literatures, the Puräëas and
histories.  In  all  Vedic  literatures  Kåñëa  is  thus  described,  and  the  Supreme
Lord Himself also says in the Fourth Chapter, “Although I am unborn, I appear
on this earth to establish religious principles.” He is the supreme origin; He has
no  cause,  for  He  is  the  cause  of  all  causes,  and  everything  is  emanating  from
Him. This perfect knowledge can be had by the grace of the Supreme Lord.

Here  Arjuna  expresses  himself  through  the  grace  of  Kåñëa.  If  we  want  to
understand  Bhagavad-gétä,  we  should  accept  the  statements  in  these  two
verses.  This  is  called  the  paramparä  system,  acceptance  of  the  disciplic
succession.  Unless  one  is  in  the  disciplic  succession,  he  cannot  understand
Bhagavad-gétä. 
so-called  academic  education.
Unfortunately  those  proud  of  their  academic  education,  despite  so  much
evidence in Vedic literatures, stick to their obstinate conviction that Kåñëa is
an ordinary person.

is  not  possible  by 

It 

TEXT  14

SavRMaeTad*Ta& MaNYae YaNMaa& vdiSa ke-Xav )

Na ih Tae >aGavNVYai¢&- ivdudeRva Na daNava" )) 14 ))

sarvam etad åtaà manye
yan mäà vadasi keçava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktià
vidur devä na dänaväù

SYNONYMS

sarvam—all; etat—this; åtam—truth; manye—I accept; yat—which;
mäm—unto me; vadasi—You tell; keçava—O Kåñëa; na—never; hi—certainly;

te—Your; bhagavan—O Personality of Godhead; vyaktim—revelation;
viduù—can know; deväù—the demigods; na—nor; dänaväù—the demons.

TRANSLATION

O Kåñëa, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither the

demigods nor the demons, O Lord, can understand Your personality.

PURPORT

Arjuna  herein  confirms  that  persons  of  faithless  and  demonic  nature
cannot understand Kåñëa. He is not known even by the demigods, so what to
speak  of  the  so-called  scholars  of  this  modern  world?  By  the  grace  of  the
Supreme  Lord,  Arjuna  has  understood  that  the  Supreme  Truth  is  Kåñëa  and
that He is the perfect one. One should therefore follow the path of Arjuna. He
received  the  authority  of Bhagavad-gétä. As described in the Fourth Chapter,
the  paramparä  system  of  disciplic  succession  for  the  understanding  of
Bhagavad-gétä  was  lost,  and  therefore  Kåñëa  reestablished  that  disciplic
succession with Arjuna because He considered Arjuna His intimate friend and
a  great  devotee.  Therefore,  as  stated  in  our  Introduction  to  Gétopaniñad,
Bhagavad-gétä  should  be  understood  in  the  paramparä  system.  When  the
paramparä  system  was  lost,  Arjuna  was  selected  to  rejuvenate  it.  The
acceptance by Arjuna of all that Kåñëa says should be emulated; then we can
understand  the  essence  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  and  then  only  can  we  understand
that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  15

SvYaMaevaTMaNaaTMaaNa& veTQa Tv& PauåzaetaMa )

>aUTa>aavNa >aUTaeXa devdev JaGaTPaTae )) 15 ))

svayam evätmanätmänaà
vettha tvaà puruñottama
bhüta-bhävana bhüteça

deva-deva jagat-pate

SYNONYMS

svayam—personally; eva—certainly; ätmanä—by Yourself;
ätmänam—Yourself; vettha—know; tvam—You; puruña-uttama—O greatest of
all persons; bhüta-bhävana—O origin of everything; bhüta-éça—O Lord of
everything; deva-deva—O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate—O Lord of the
entire universe.

TRANSLATION

Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own internal potency, O Supreme

Person, origin of all, Lord of all beings, God of gods, Lord of the universe!

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Lord,  Kåñëa,  can  be  known  by  persons  who  are  in  a
relationship with Him through the discharge of devotional service, like Arjuna
and  his  followers.  Persons  of  demonic  or  atheistic  mentality  cannot  know
Kåñëa.  Mental  speculation  that  leads  one  away  from  the  Supreme  Lord  is  a
serious sin, and one who does not know Kåñëa should not try to comment on
Bhagavad-gétä.  Bhagavad-gétä  is  the  statement  of  Kåñëa,  and  since  it  is  the
science of Kåñëa, it should be understood from Kåñëa as Arjuna understood it.
It should not be received from atheistic persons.
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11):

vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate

The  Supreme  Truth  is  realized  in  three  aspects:  as  impersonal  Brahman,
localized Paramätmä and at last as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So at
the last stage of understanding the Absolute Truth, one comes to the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  A  common  man  or  even  a  liberated  man  who  has

realized  impersonal  Brahman  or  localized  Paramätmä  may  not  understand
God’s  personality.  Such  men,  therefore,  may  endeavor  to  understand  the
Supreme Person from the verses of Bhagavad-gétä, which are being spoken by
this person, Kåñëa. Sometimes the impersonalists accept Kåñëa as Bhagavän, or
they  accept  His  authority.  Yet  many  liberated  persons  cannot  understand
Kåñëa as Puruñottama, the Supreme Person. Therefore Arjuna addresses Him
as Puruñottama. Yet one still may not understand that Kåñëa is the father of all
living entities. Therefore Arjuna addresses Him as Bhüta-bhävana. And if one
comes  to  know  Him  as  the  father  of  all  the  living  entities,  still  one  may  not
know  Him  as  the  supreme  controller;  therefore  He  is  addressed  here  as
Bhüteça, the supreme controller of everyone. And even if one knows Kåñëa as
the supreme controller of all living entities, still one may not know that He is
the origin of all the demigods; therefore He is addressed herein as Devadeva,
the  worshipful  God  of  all  demigods.  And  even  if  one  knows  Him  as  the
worshipful  God  of  all  demigods,  one  may  not  know  that  He  is  the  supreme
proprietor of everything; therefore He is addressed as Jagatpati. Thus the truth
about  Kåñëa  is  established  in  this  verse  by  the  realization  of  Arjuna,  and  we
should follow in the footsteps of Arjuna to understand Kåñëa as He is.

TEXT  16

v¢u-MahRSYaXaeze<a idVYaa ùaTMaiv>aUTaYa" )

Yaai>aivR>aUiTai>al/aeRk-aiNaMaa&STv& VYaaPYa iTaïiSa )) 16 ))

vaktum arhasy açeñeëa
divyä hy ätma-vibhütayaù
yäbhir vibhütibhir lokän
imäàs tvaà vyäpya tiñöhasi

SYNONYMS

vaktum—to say; arhasi—You deserve; açeñeëa—in detail; divyäù—divine;
hi—certainly; ätma—Your own; vibhütayaù—opulences; yäbhiù—by which;

vibhütibhiù—opulences; lokän—all the planets; imän—these; tvam—You;
vyäpya—pervading; tiñöhasi—remain.

TRANSLATION

Please tell me in detail of Your divine opulences by which You pervade all

these worlds.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  it  appears  that  Arjuna  is  already  satisfied  with  his
understanding  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa.  By  Kåñëa’s
grace,  Arjuna  has  personal  experience,  intelligence  and  knowledge  and
whatever  else  a  person  may  have  through  all  these  agencies,  and  he  has
understood Kåñëa to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For him there is
no doubt, yet he is asking Kåñëa to explain His all-pervading nature. People in
general  and  the  impersonalists  in  particular  concern  themselves  mainly  with
the  all-pervading  nature  of  the  Supreme.  So  Arjuna  is  asking  Kåñëa  how  He
exists  in  His  all-pervading  aspect  through  His  different  energies.  One  should
know that this is being asked by Arjuna on behalf of the common people.

TEXT  17

k-Qa& ivÛaMah& YaaeiGa&STva& Sada PairicNTaYaNa( )

ke-zu ke-zu c >aavezu icNTYaae_iSa >aGavNMaYaa )) 17 ))

kathaà vidyäm ahaà yogiàs
tväà sadä paricintayan
keñu keñu ca bhäveñu
cintyo ’si bhagavan mayä

SYNONYMS

katham—how; vidyäm aham—shall I know; yogin—O supreme mystic;

tväm—You; sadä—always; paricintayan—thinking of; keñu—in which;
keñu—in which; ca—also; bhäveñu—natures; cintyaù asi—You are to be
remembered; bhagavan—O Supreme; mayä—by me.

TRANSLATION

O Kåñëa, O supreme mystic, how shall I constantly think of You, and how

shall I know You? In what various forms are You to be remembered, O
Supreme Personality of Godhead?

PURPORT

As it is stated in the previous chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is  covered  by  His  yoga-mäyä.  Only  surrendered  souls  and  devotees  can  see
Him.  Now  Arjuna  is  convinced  that  His  friend,  Kåñëa,  is  the  Supreme
Godhead, but he wants to know the general process by which the all-pervading
Lord  can  be  understood  by  the  common  man.  Common  men,  including  the
demons  and  atheists,  cannot  know  Kåñëa,  because  He  is  guarded  by  His
yoga-mäyä  energy.  Again,  these  questions  are  asked  by  Arjuna  for  their
benefit. The superior devotee is concerned not only for his own understanding
but for the understanding of all mankind. So Arjuna, out of his mercy, because
he is a Vaiñëava, a devotee, is opening for the common man the understanding
of  the  all-pervasiveness  of  the Supreme Lord. He addresses Kåñëa specifically
as yogin because Çré Kåñëa is the master of the yoga-mäyä energy, by which He
is covered and uncovered to the common man. The common man who has no
love  for  Kåñëa  cannot  always  think  of  Kåñëa;  therefore  he  has  to  think
materially.  Arjuna  is  considering  the  mode  of  thinking  of  the  materialistic
persons of this world. The words keñu keñu ca bhäveñu refer to material nature
(the  word  bhäva  means  “physical  things”).  Because  materialists  cannot
understand  Kåñëa  spiritually,  they  are  advised  to  concentrate  the  mind  on
physical  things  and  try  to  see  how  Kåñëa  is  manifested  by  physical
representations.

TEXT  18

ivSTare<aaTMaNaae YaaeGa& iv>aUiTa& c JaNaadRNa )

>aUYa" k-QaYa Ta*iáihR é*<vTaae NaaiSTa Mae_Ma*TaMa( )) 18 ))

vistareëätmano yogaà
vibhütià ca janärdana
bhüyaù kathaya tåptir hi
çåëvato nästi me ’måtam

SYNONYMS

vistareëa—in detail; ätmanaù—Your; yogam—mystic power;
vibhütim—opulences; ca—also; jana-ardana—O killer of the atheists;
bhüyaù—again; kathaya—describe; tåptiù—satisfaction; hi—certainly;
çåëvataù—hearing; na asti—there is not; me—my; amåtam—nectar.

TRANSLATION

O Janärdana, again please describe in detail the mystic power of Your
opulences. I am never satiated in hearing about You, for the more I hear the
more I want to taste the nectar of Your words.

PURPORT

A similar statement was made to Süta Gosvämé by the åñis of Naimiñäraëya,

headed by Çaunaka. That statement is:

vayaà tu na vitåpyäma
uttama-çloka-vikrame
yac chåëvatäà rasa-jïänäà
svädu svädu pade pade

“One  can  never  be  satiated  even  though  one  continuously  hears  the
transcendental pastimes of Kåñëa, who is glorified by excellent prayers. Those
who have entered into a transcendental relationship with Kåñëa relish at every

step the descriptions of the pastimes of the Lord.” (Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.1.19)
Thus  Arjuna  is  interested  in  hearing  about  Kåñëa,  and  specifically  how  He
remains as the all-pervading Supreme Lord.

Now  as  far  as  amåtam,  nectar,  is  concerned,  any  narration  or  statement
concerning  Kåñëa  is  just  like  nectar.  And  this  nectar  can  be  perceived  by
practical  experience.  Modern  stories,  fiction  and  histories  are  different  from
the  transcendental  pastimes  of  the  Lord  in  that  one  will  tire  of  hearing
mundane  stories  but  one  never  tires  of  hearing  about  Kåñëa.  It  is  for  this
reason only that the history of the whole universe is replete with references to
the  pastimes  of  the  incarnations  of  Godhead.  The  Puräëas  are  histories  of
bygone ages that relate the pastimes of the various incarnations of the Lord. In
this way the reading matter remains forever fresh, despite repeated readings.

TEXT  19

é[q>aGavaNauvac

hNTa Tae k-QaiYaZYaaiMa idVYaa ùaTMaiv>aUTaYa" )

Pa[aDaaNYaTa" ku-åé[eï NaaSTYaNTaae ivSTarSYa Mae )) 19 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
hanta te kathayiñyämi
divyä hy ätma-vibhütayaù
prädhänyataù kuru-çreñöha
nästy anto vistarasya me

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta—yes;
te—unto you; kathayiñyämi—I shall speak; divyäù—divine; hi—certainly;
ätma-vibhütayaù—personal opulences; prädhänyataù—which are principal;
kuru-çreñöha—O best of the Kurus; na asti—there is not; antaù—limit;
vistarasya—to the extent; me—My.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Yes, I will tell you of My

splendorous manifestations, but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna,
for My opulence is limitless.

PURPORT

It is not possible to comprehend the greatness of Kåñëa and His opulences.
The  senses  of  the  individual  soul  are  limited  and  do  not  permit  him  to
understand the totality of Kåñëa’s affairs. Still the devotees try to understand
Kåñëa, but not on the principle that they will be able to understand Kåñëa fully
at any specific time or in any state of life. Rather, the very topics of Kåñëa are
so  relishable  that  they  appear  to  the  devotees  as  nectar.  Thus  the  devotees
enjoy them. In discussing Kåñëa’s opulences and His diverse energies, the pure
devotees  take  transcendental  pleasure.  Therefore  they  want  to  hear  and
discuss them. Kåñëa knows that living entities do not understand the extent of
His opulences; He therefore agrees to state only the principal manifestations of
His different energies. The word prädhänyataù (“principal”) is very important
because we can understand only a few of the principal details of the Supreme
Lord, for His features are unlimited. It is not possible to understand them all.
And vibhüti, as used in this verse, refers to the opulences by which He controls
the whole manifestation. In the Amara-koça dictionary it is stated that vibhüti
indicates an exceptional opulence.

The  impersonalist  or  pantheist  cannot  understand  the  exceptional
opulences of the Supreme Lord nor the manifestations of His divine energies.
Both  in  the  material  world  and  in  the  spiritual  world  His  energies  are
distributed  in  every  variety  of  manifestation.  Now  Kåñëa  is  describing  what
can  be  directly  perceived  by  the  common  man;  thus  part  of  His  variegated
energy is described in this way.

TEXT  20

AhMaaTMaa Gau@ake-Xa SavR>aUTaaXaYaiSQaTa" )

AhMaaidê MaDYa& c >aUTaaNaaMaNTa Wv c )) 20 ))

aham ätmä guòäkeça
sarva-bhütäçaya-sthitaù
aham ädiç ca madhyaà ca
bhütänäm anta eva ca

SYNONYMS

aham—I; ätmä—the soul; guòäkeça—O Arjuna; sarva-bhüta—of all living
entities; äçaya-sthitaù—situated within the heart; aham—I am; ädiù—the
origin; ca—also; madhyam—middle; ca—also; bhütänäm—of all living entities;
antaù—end; eva—certainly; ca—and.

TRANSLATION

I am the Supersoul, O Arjuna, seated in the hearts of all living entities. I am

the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.

PURPORT

In this verse Arjuna is addressed as Guòäkeça, which means “one who has
conquered the darkness of sleep.” For those who are sleeping in the darkness of
ignorance,  it  is  not  possible  to  understand  how  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead  manifests  Himself  in  various  ways  in  the  material  and  spiritual
worlds. Thus this address by Kåñëa to Arjuna is significant. Because Arjuna is
above such darkness, the Personality of Godhead agrees to describe His various
opulences.

Kåñëa  first  informs  Arjuna  that  He  is  the  soul  of  the  entire  cosmic
manifestation by dint of His primary expansion. Before the material creation,
the Supreme Lord, by His plenary expansion, accepts the puruña incarnations,
and  from  Him  everything  begins.  Therefore  He  is  ätmä,  the  soul  of  the
mahat-tattva, the universal elements. The total material energy is not the cause

of the creation; actually the Mahä-Viñëu enters into the mahat-tattva, the total
material energy. He is the soul. When Mahä-Viñëu enters into the manifested
universes,  He  again  manifests  Himself  as  the  Supersoul  in  each  and  every
entity.  We  have  experience  that  the  personal  body  of  the  living  entity  exists
due  to  the  presence  of  the  spiritual  spark.  Without  the  existence  of  the
spiritual spark, the body cannot develop. Similarly, the material manifestation
cannot  develop  unless  the  Supreme  Soul,  Kåñëa,  enters.  As  stated  in  the
Subala  Upaniñad,  prakåty-ädi-sarva-bhütäntar-yämé  sarva-çeñé  ca  näräyaëaù:
“The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  existing  as  the  Supersoul  in  all
manifested universes.”

The  three  puruña-avatäras  are  described  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam.  They  are
also  described  in  the  Sätvata-tantra.  Viñëos  tu  tréëi  rüpäëi  puruñäkhyäny  atho
viduù:  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  manifests  three  features—as
Käraëodakaçäyé  Viñëu,  Garbhodakaçäyé  Viñëu  and  Kñérodakaçäyé  Viñëu—in
this  material  manifestation.  The  Mahä-Viñëu,  or  Käraëodakaçäyé  Viñëu,  is
described  in  the  Brahma-saàhitä  (5.47).  Yaù  käraëärëava-jale  bhajati  sma
yoga-nidräm: the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, the cause of all causes, lies down in the
cosmic ocean as Mahä-Viñëu. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is  the  beginning  of  this  universe,  the  maintainer  of  the  universal
manifestations, and the end of all energy.

TEXT  21

AaidTYaaNaaMah& ivZ<auJYaaeRiTaza& rivr&éuMaaNa( )

MarqicMaRåTaaMaiSMa Na+a}aa<aaMah& XaXaq )) 21 ))

ädityänäm ahaà viñëur
jyotiñäà ravir aàçumän
marécir marutäm asmi
nakñaträëäm ahaà çaçé

SYNONYMS

ädityänäm—of the Ädityas; aham—I am; viñëuù—the Supreme Lord;
jyotiñäm—of all luminaries; raviù—the sun; aàçu-män—radiant;
maréciù—Maréci; marutäm—of the Maruts; asmi—I am; nakñaträëäm—of the
stars; aham—I am; çaçé—the moon.

TRANSLATION

Of the Ädityas I am Viñëu, of lights I am the radiant sun, of the Maruts I

am Maréci, and among the stars I am the moon.

PURPORT

There  are  twelve  Ädityas,  of  which  Kåñëa  is  the  principal.  Among  all  the
luminaries  twinkling  in  the  sky,  the  sun  is  the  chief,  and  in  the
Brahma-saàhitä  the  sun  is  accepted  as  the  glowing  eye  of  the  Supreme  Lord.
There  are  fifty  varieties  of  wind  blowing  in  space,  and  of  these  winds  the
controlling deity, Maréci, represents Kåñëa.

Among  the  stars,  the  moon  is  the  most  prominent  at  night,  and  thus  the
moon represents Kåñëa. It appears from this verse that the moon is one of the
stars;  therefore  the  stars  that  twinkle  in  the  sky  also  reflect  the  light  of  the
sun. The theory that there are many suns within the universe is not accepted
by  Vedic  literature.  The  sun  is  one,  and  as  by  the  reflection  of  the  sun  the
moon  illuminates,  so  also  do  the  stars.  Since  Bhagavad-gétä  indicates  herein
that  the  moon  is  one  of  the  stars,  the  twinkling  stars  are  not  suns  but  are
similar to the moon.

TEXT  22

vedaNaa& SaaMavedae_iSMa devaNaaMaiSMa vaSav" )

wiNd]Yaa<aa& MaNaêaiSMa >aUTaaNaaMaiSMa ceTaNaa )) 22 ))

vedänäà säma-vedo ’smi
devänäm asmi väsavaù
indriyäëäà manaç cäsmi

bhütänäm asmi cetanä

SYNONYMS

vedänäm—of all the Vedas; säma-vedaù—the Säma Veda; asmi—I am;
devänäm—of all the demigods; asmi—I am; väsavaù—the heavenly king;
indriyäëäm—of all the senses; manaù—the mind; ca—also; asmi—I am;
bhütänäm—of all living entities; asmi—I am; cetanä—the living force.

TRANSLATION

Of the Vedas I am the Säma Veda; of the demigods I am Indra, the king of
heaven; of the senses I am the mind; and in living beings I am the living force
[consciousness].

PURPORT

The  difference  between  matter  and  spirit  is  that  matter  has  no
consciousness  like  the  living  entity;  therefore  this  consciousness  is  supreme
and eternal. Consciousness cannot be produced by a combination of matter.

TEXT  23

åd]a<aa& XaªrêaiSMa ivtaeXaae Ya+ar+aSaaMa( )

vSaUNaa& Paavk-êaiSMa Maeå" iXa%ir<aaMahMa( )) 23 ))

rudräëäà çaìkaraç cäsmi
vitteço yakña-rakñasäm
vasünäà pävakaç cäsmi
meruù çikhariëäm aham

SYNONYMS

rudräëäm—of all the Rudras; çaìkaraù—Lord Çiva; ca—also; asmi—I am;
vitta-éçaù—the lord of the treasury of the demigods; yakña-rakñasäm—of the

Yakñas and Räkñasas; vasünäm—of the Vasus; pävakaù—fire; ca—also; asmi—I
am; meruù—Meru; çikhariëäm—of all mountains; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Of all the Rudras I am Lord Çiva, of the Yakñas and Räkñasas I am the Lord
of wealth [Kuvera], of the Vasus I am fire [Agni], and of mountains I am Meru.

PURPORT

There are eleven Rudras, of whom Çaìkara, Lord Çiva, is predominant. He
is the incarnation of the Supreme Lord in charge of the mode of ignorance in
the  universe.  The  leader  of  the  Yakñas  and  Räkñasas  is  Kuvera,  the  master
treasurer  of  the  demigods,  and  he  is  a  representation  of  the  Supreme  Lord.
Meru is a mountain famed for its rich natural resources.

TEXT  24

PauraeDaSaa& c Mau:Ya& Maa& iviÖ PaaQaR b*hSPaiTaMa( )

SaeNaaNaqNaaMah& Sk-Nd" SarSaaMaiSMa SaaGar" )) 24 ))

purodhasäà ca mukhyaà mäà
viddhi pärtha båhaspatim
senänénäm ahaà skandaù
sarasäm asmi sägaraù

SYNONYMS

purodhasäm—of all priests; ca—also; mukhyam—the chief; mäm—Me;
viddhi—understand; pärtha—O son of Påthä; båhaspatim—Båhaspati;
senänénäm—of all commanders; aham—I am; skandaù—Kärtikeya;
sarasäm—of all reservoirs of water; asmi—I am; sägaraù—the ocean.

TRANSLATION

Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Båhaspati. Of generals I am

Kärtikeya, and of bodies of water I am the ocean.

PURPORT

Indra is the chief demigod of the heavenly planets and is known as the king
of the heavens. The planet on which he reigns is called Indraloka. Båhaspati is
Indra’s priest, and since Indra is the chief of all kings, Båhaspati is the chief of
all priests. And as Indra is the chief of all kings, similarly Skanda, or Kärtikeya,
the son of Pärvaté and Lord Çiva, is the chief of all military commanders. And
of all bodies of water, the ocean is the greatest. These representations of Kåñëa
only give hints of His greatness.

TEXT  25

Mahzs<aa& >a*Gaurh& iGaraMaSMYaek-Ma+arMa( )

YajaNaa& JaPaYajae_iSMa SQaavra<aa& ihMaal/Ya" )) 25 ))

maharñéëäà bhågur ahaà
giräm asmy ekam akñaram
yajïänäà japa-yajïo ’smi
sthävaräëäà himälayaù

SYNONYMS

mahä-åñéëäm—among the great sages; bhåguù—Bhågu; aham—I am; giräm—of
vibrations; asmi—I am; ekam akñaram—praëava; yajïänäm—of sacrifices;
japa-yajïaù—chanting; asmi—I am; sthävaräëäm—of immovable things;
himälayaù—the Himälayan mountains.

TRANSLATION

Of the great sages I am Bhågu; of vibrations I am the transcendental oà. Of
sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and of immovable things I

am the Himälayas.

PURPORT

Brahmä,  the  first  living  creature  within  the  universe,  created  several  sons
for the propagation of various kinds of species. Among these sons, Bhågu is the
most  powerful  sage.  Of  all  the  transcendental  vibrations,  the  oà  (oàkära)
represents  Kåñëa.  Of  all  sacrifices,  the  chanting  of  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare is
the  purest  representation  of  Kåñëa.  Sometimes  animal  sacrifices  are
recommended,  but  in  the  sacrifice  of  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  there  is  no
question of violence. It is the simplest and the purest. Whatever is sublime in
the worlds is a representation of Kåñëa. Therefore the Himälayas, the greatest
mountains in the world, also represent Him. The mountain named Meru was
mentioned  in  a  previous  verse,  but  Meru  is  sometimes  movable,  whereas  the
Himälayas are never movable. Thus the Himälayas are greater than Meru.

TEXT  26

AìTQa" SavRv*+aa<aa& devzs<aa& c Naard" )

GaNDavaR<aa& ic}arQa" iSaÖaNaa& k-iPal/ae MauiNa" )) 26 ))

açvatthaù sarva-våkñäëäà
devarñéëäà ca näradaù
gandharväëäà citrarathaù
siddhänäà kapilo muniù

SYNONYMS

açvatthaù—the banyan tree; sarva-våkñäëäm—of all trees; deva-åñéëäm—of all
the sages amongst the demigods; ca—and; näradaù—Närada;
gandharväëäm—of the citizens of the Gandharva planet;
citrarathaù—Citraratha; siddhänäm—of all those who are perfected; kapilaù
muniù—Kapila Muni.

TRANSLATION

Of all trees I am the banyan tree, and of the sages among the demigods I am
Närada. Of the Gandharvas I am Citraratha, and among perfected beings I am
the sage Kapila.

PURPORT

The  banyan  tree  (açvattha)  is  one  of  the  highest  and  most  beautiful  trees,
and  people  in  India  often  worship  it  as  one  of  their  daily  morning  rituals.
Amongst  the  demigods  they  also  worship  Närada,  who  is  considered  the
greatest  devotee  in  the  universe.  Thus  he  is  the  representation  of  Kåñëa  as  a
devotee. The Gandharva planet is filled with entities who sing beautifully, and
among them the best singer is Citraratha. Amongst the perfect living entities,
Kapila, the son of Devahüti, is a representative of Kåñëa. He is considered an
the
incarnation  of  Kåñëa,  and  His  philosophy 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.  Later  on  another  Kapila  became  famous,  but  his
philosophy was atheistic. Thus there is a gulf of difference between them.

is  mentioned 

in 

TEXT  27

oÀE"é[vSaMaìaNaa& iviÖ MaaMaMa*TaaeÙvMa( )

WeravTa& GaJaeNd]a<aa& Nara<aa& c NaraiDaPaMa( )) 27 ))

uccaiùçravasam açvänäà
viddhi mäm amåtodbhavam
airävataà gajendräëäà
naräëäà ca narädhipam

SYNONYMS

uccaiùçravasam—Uccaiùçravä; açvänäm—among horses; viddhi—know;
mäm—Me; amåta-udbhavam—produced from the churning of the ocean;

airävatam—Airävata; gaja-indräëäm—of lordly elephants; naräëäm—among
human beings; ca—and; nara-adhipam—the king.

TRANSLATION

Of horses know Me to be Uccaiùçravä, produced during the churning of the

ocean for nectar. Of lordly elephants I am Airävata, and among men I am the
monarch.

PURPORT

The devotee demigods and the demons (asuras) once took part in churning
the sea. From this churning, nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Çiva
drank  the  poison.  From  the  nectar  were  produced  many  entities,  of  which
there  was  a  horse  named  Uccaiùçravä.  Another  animal  produced  from  the
nectar  was  an  elephant  named  Airävata.  Because  these  two  animals  were
produced  from  nectar,  they  have  special  significance,  and  they  are
representatives of Kåñëa.

Amongst the human beings, the king is the representative of Kåñëa because
Kåñëa is the maintainer of the universe, and the kings, who are appointed on
account of their godly qualifications, are maintainers of their kingdoms. Kings
like  Mahäräja  Yudhiñöhira,  Mahäräja  Parékñit  and  Lord  Räma  were  all  highly
righteous kings who always thought of the citizens’ welfare. In Vedic literature,
the  king  is  considered  to  be  the  representative  of  God.  In  this  age,  however,
with the corruption of the principles of religion, monarchy decayed and is now
finally abolished. It is to be understood that in the past, however, people were
more happy under righteous kings.

TEXT  28

AaYauDaaNaaMah& vJa]& DaeNaUNaaMaiSMa k-aMaDauk(- )

Pa[JaNaêaiSMa k-NdPaR" SaPaaR<aaMaiSMa vaSauik-" )) 28 ))

äyudhänäm ahaà vajraà

dhenünäm asmi kämadhuk
prajanaç cäsmi kandarpaù
sarpäëäm asmi väsukiù

SYNONYMS

äyudhänäm—of all weapons; aham—I am; vajram—the thunderbolt;
dhenünäm—of cows; asmi—I am; käma-dhuk—the surabhi cow; prajanaù—the
cause for begetting children; ca—and; asmi—I am; kandarpaù—Cupid;
sarpäëäm—of serpents; asmi—I am; väsukiù—Väsuki.

TRANSLATION

Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi. Of causes

for procreation I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and of serpents I am Väsuki.

PURPORT

The  thunderbolt,  indeed  a  mighty  weapon,  represents  Kåñëa’s  power.  In
Kåñëaloka in the spiritual sky there are cows which can be milked at any time,
and they give as much milk as one likes. Of course such cows do not exist in
this material world, but there is mention of them in Kåñëaloka. The Lord keeps
many such cows, which are called surabhi. It is stated that the Lord is engaged
in  herding  the  surabhi  cows.  Kandarpa  is  the  sex  desire  for  presenting  good
sons;  therefore  Kandarpa  is  the  representative  of  Kåñëa.  Sometimes  sex  is
engaged in only for sense gratification; such sex does not represent Kåñëa. But
sex  for  the  generation  of  good  children  is  called  Kandarpa  and  represents
Kåñëa.

TEXT  29

ANaNTaêaiSMa NaaGaaNaa& vå<aae YaadSaaMahMa( )

iPaTa›<aaMaYaRMaa caiSMa YaMa" Sa&YaMaTaaMahMa( )) 29 ))

anantaç cäsmi nägänäà
varuëo yädasäm aham
pitèëäm aryamä cäsmi
yamaù saàyamatäm aham

SYNONYMS

anantaù—Ananta; ca—also; asmi—I am; nägänäm—of the many-hooded
serpents; varuëaù—the demigod controlling the water; yädasäm—of all
aquatics; aham—I am; pitèëäm—of the ancestors; aryamä—Aryamä; ca—also;
asmi—I am; yamaù—the controller of death; saàyamatäm—of all regulators;
aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Of the many-hooded Nägas I am Ananta, and among the aquatics I am the
demigod Varuëa. Of departed ancestors I am Aryamä, and among the dispensers
of law I am Yama, the lord of death.

PURPORT

Among  the  many-hooded  Näga  serpents,  Ananta  is  the  greatest,  as  is  the
demigod Varuëa among the aquatics. They both represent Kåñëa. There is also
a  planet  of  Pitäs,  ancestors,  presided  over  by  Aryamä,  who  represents  Kåñëa.
There  are  many  living  entities  who  give  punishment  to  the  miscreants,  and
among them Yama is the chief. Yama is situated in a planet near this earthly
planet.  After  death  those  who  are  very  sinful  are  taken  there,  and  Yama
arranges different kinds of punishments for them.

TEXT  30

Pa[úadêaiSMa dETYaaNaa& k-al/" k-l/YaTaaMahMa( )

Ma*Gaa<aa& c Ma*GaeNd]ae_h& vENaTaeYaê Pai+a<aaMa( )) 30 ))

prahlädaç cäsmi daityänäà
kälaù kalayatäm aham
mågäëäà ca mågendro ’haà
vainateyaç ca pakñiëäm

SYNONYMS

prahlädaù—Prahläda; ca—also; asmi—I am; daityänäm—of the demons;
kälaù—time; kalayatäm—of subduers; aham—I am; mågäëäm—of animals;
ca—and; måga-indraù—the lion; aham—I am; vainateyaù—Garuòa; ca—also;
pakñiëäm—of birds.

TRANSLATION

Among the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahläda, among subduers I am

time, among beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuòa.

PURPORT

Diti and Aditi are two sisters. The sons of Aditi are called Ädityas, and the
sons of Diti are called Daityas. All the Ädityas are devotees of the Lord, and
all the Daityas are atheistic. Although Prahläda was born in the family of the
Daityas, he was a great devotee from his childhood. Because of his devotional
service and godly nature, he is considered to be a representative of Kåñëa.

There are many subduing principles, but time wears down all things in the
material universe and so represents Kåñëa. Of the many animals, the lion is the
most powerful and ferocious, and of the million varieties of birds, Garuòa, the
bearer of Lord Viñëu, is the greatest.

TEXT  31

PavNa" PavTaaMaiSMa raMa" Xañ>a*TaaMahMa( )

‡za<aa& Mak-rêaiSMa óaeTaSaaMaiSMa Jaaövq )) 31 ))

pavanaù pavatäm asmi
rämaù çastra-bhåtäm aham
jhañäëäà makaraç cäsmi
srotasäm asmi jähnavé

SYNONYMS

pavanaù—the wind; pavatäm—of all that purifies; asmi—I am; rämaù—Räma;
çastra-bhåtäm—of the carriers of weapons; aham—I am; jhañäëäm—of all fish;
makaraù—the shark; ca—also; asmi—I am; srotasäm—of flowing rivers;
asmi—I am; jähnavé—the River Ganges.

TRANSLATION

Of purifiers I am the wind, of the wielders of weapons I am Räma, of fishes I

am the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.

PURPORT

Of all the aquatics the shark is one of the biggest and is certainly the most

dangerous to man. Thus the shark represents Kåñëa.

TEXT  32

SaGaaR<aaMaaidrNTaê MaDYa& cEvahMaJauRNa )

ADYaaTMaivÛa ivÛaNaa& vad" Pa[vdTaaMahMa( )) 32 ))

sargäëäm ädir antaç ca
madhyaà caiväham arjuna
adhyätma-vidyä vidyänäà
vädaù pravadatäm aham

SYNONYMS

sargäëäm—of all creations; ädiù—the beginning; antaù—end; ca—and;

madhyam—middle; ca—also; eva—certainly; aham—I am; arjuna—O Arjuna;
adhyätma-vidyä—spiritual knowledge; vidyänäm—of all education; vädaù—the
natural conclusion; pravadatäm—of arguments; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O

Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, and among
logicians I am the conclusive truth.

PURPORT

Among  the  created  manifestations,  the  first  is  the  creation  of  the  total
material  elements.  As  explained  before,  the  cosmic  manifestation  is  created
and  conducted  by  Mahä-Viñëu,  Garbhodakaçäyé  Viñëu  and  Kñérodakaçäyé
Viñëu,  and  then  again  it  is  annihilated  by  Lord  Çiva.  Brahmä  is  a  secondary
creator.  All  these  agents  of  creation,  maintenance  and  annihilation  are
incarnations  of  the  material  qualities  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Therefore  He  is
the beginning, the middle and the end of all creation.

For advanced education there are various kinds of books of knowledge, such
as  the  four  Vedas,  their  six  supplements,  the  Vedänta-sütra,  books  of  logic,
books  of  religiosity  and  the  Puräëas.  So  all  together  there  are  fourteen
divisions  of  books  of  education.  Of  these,  the  book  which  presents
adhyätma-vidyä, 
the
Vedänta-sütra—represents Kåñëa.

knowledge—in 

particular, 

spiritual 

Among  logicians  there  are  different  kinds  of  argument.  Supporting  one’s
argument  with  evidence  that  also  supports  the  opposing  side  is  called  jalpa.
Merely  trying  to  defeat  one’s  opponent  is  called  vitaëòä.  But  the  actual
conclusion is called väda. This conclusive truth is a representation of Kåñëa.

TEXT  33

A+ara<aaMak-arae_iSMa ÜNÜ" SaaMaaiSak-SYa c )

AhMaeva+aYa" k-al/ae DaaTaah& ivìTaaeMau%" )) 33 ))

akñaräëäm a-käro ’smi
dvandvaù sämäsikasya ca
aham eväkñayaù kälo
dhätähaà viçvato-mukhaù

SYNONYMS

akñaräëäm—of letters; a-käraù—the first letter; asmi—I am; dvandvaù—the
dual; sämäsikasya—of compounds; ca—and; aham—I am; eva—certainly;
akñayaù—eternal; kälaù—time; dhätä—the creator; aham—I am;
viçvataù-mukhaù—Brahmä.

TRANSLATION

Of letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual

compound. I am also inexhaustible time, and of creators I am Brahmä.

PURPORT

A-kära,  the  first  letter  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet,  is  the  beginning  of  the
Vedic  literature.  Without  a-kära,  nothing  can  be  sounded;  therefore  it  is  the
beginning of sound. In Sanskrit there are also many compound words, of which
the dual word, like räma-kåñëa, is called dvandva. In this compound, the words
räma  and  kåñëa  have  the  same  form,  and  therefore  the  compound  is  called
dual.

Among  all  kinds  of  killers,  time  is  the  ultimate  because  time  kills
everything. Time is the representative of Kåñëa because in due course of time
there will be a great fire and everything will be annihilated.

Among the living entities who are creators, Brahmä, who has four heads, is

the chief. Therefore he is a representative of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa.

TEXT  34

Ma*TYau" SavRhrêahMauÙvê >aivZYaTaaMa( )

k-IiTaR" é[qvaRKc Naarq<aa& SMa*iTaMaeRDaa Da*iTa" +aMaa )) 34 ))

måtyuù sarva-haraç cäham
udbhavaç ca bhaviñyatäm
kértiù çrér väk ca näréëäà
småtir medhä dhåtiù kñamä

SYNONYMS

måtyuù—death; sarva-haraù—all-devouring; ca—also; aham—I am;
udbhavaù—generation; ca—also; bhaviñyatäm—of future manifestations;
kértiù—fame; çréù—opulence or beauty; väk—fine speech; ca—also;
näréëäm—of women; småtiù—memory; medhä—intelligence;
dhåtiù—firmness; kñamä—patience.

TRANSLATION

I am all-devouring death, and I am the generating principle of all that is yet

to be. Among women I am fame, fortune, fine speech, memory, intelligence,
steadfastness and patience.

PURPORT

As soon as a man is born, he dies at every moment. Thus death is devouring
every  living  entity  at  every  moment,  but  the  last  stroke  is  called  death  itself.
That death is Kåñëa. As for future development, all living entities undergo six
basic  changes.  They  are  born,  they  grow,  they  remain  for  some  time,  they
reproduce, they dwindle, and finally they vanish. Of these changes, the first is
deliverance  from  the  womb,  and  that  is  Kåñëa.  The  first  generation  is  the
beginning of all future activities.
The  seven  opulences 

listed—fame,  fortune,  fine  speech,  memory,
intelligence, steadfastness and patience—are considered feminine. If a person

possesses all of them or some of them he becomes glorious. If a man is famous
as a righteous man, that makes him glorious. Sanskrit is a perfect language and
is therefore very glorious. If after studying one can remember a subject matter,
he  is  gifted  with  a  good  memory,  or  småti.  And  the  ability  not  only  to  read
many  books  on  different  subject  matters  but  to  understand  them  and  apply
them when necessary is intelligence (medhä), another opulence. The ability to
overcome  unsteadiness  is  called  firmness  or  steadfastness  (dhåti).  And  when
one is fully qualified yet is humble and gentle, and when one is able to keep his
balance  both  in  sorrow  and  in  the  ecstasy  of  joy,  he  has  the  opulence  called
patience (kñamä).

TEXT  35

b*hTSaaMa TaQaa SaaMana& GaaYa}aq ^NdSaaMahMa( )

MaaSaaNaa& MaaGaRXaqzaeR_hMa*TaUNaa& ku-SauMaak-r" )) 35 ))

båhat-säma tathä sämnäà
gäyatré chandasäm aham
mäsänäà märga-çérño ’ham
åtünäà kusumäkaraù

SYNONYMS

båhat-säma—the Båhat-säma; tathä—also; sämnäm—of the Säma Veda songs;
gäyatré—the Gäyatré hymns; chandasäm—of all poetry; aham—I am;
mäsänäm—of months; märga-çérñaù—the month of November-December;
aham—I am; åtünäm—of all seasons; kusuma-äkaraù—spring.

TRANSLATION

Of the hymns in the Säma Veda I am the Båhat-säma, and of poetry I am the

Gäyatré. Of months I am Märgaçérña [November-December], and of seasons I
am flower-bearing spring.

PURPORT

It has already been explained by the Lord that amongst all the Vedas, He is
the  Säma  Veda.  The  Säma  Veda  is  rich  with  beautiful  songs  played  by  the
various demigods. One of these songs is the Båhat-säma, which has an exquisite
melody and is sung at midnight.

is  mentioned 

In Sanskrit, there are definite rules that regulate poetry; rhyme and meter
are not written whimsically, as in much modern poetry. Amongst the regulated
poetry, the Gäyatré mantra, which is chanted by the duly qualified brähmaëas,
in  the
is  the  most  prominent.  The  Gäyatré  mantra 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.  Because  the  Gäyatré  mantra  is  especially  meant  for  God
realization,  it  represents  the  Supreme  Lord.  This  mantra  is  meant  for
spiritually  advanced  people,  and  when  one  attains  success  in  chanting  it,  he
can enter into the transcendental position of the Lord. One must first acquire
the  qualities  of  the  perfectly  situated  person,  the  qualities  of  goodness
according to the laws of material nature, in order to chant the Gäyatré mantra.
The  Gäyatré  mantra  is very important in Vedic civilization and is considered
to  be  the  sound  incarnation  of  Brahman.  Brahmä  is  its  initiator,  and  it  is
passed down from him in disciplic succession.

The  month  of  November-December  is  considered  the  best  of  all  months
because in India grains are collected from the fields at this time and the people
become very happy. Of course spring is a season universally liked because it is
neither too hot nor too cold and the flowers and trees blossom and flourish. In
spring  there  are  also  many  ceremonies  commemorating  Kåñëa’s  pastimes;
therefore  this  is  considered  to  be  the  most  joyful  of  all  seasons,  and  it  is  the
representative of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa.

TEXT  36

ÛUTa& ^l/YaTaaMaiSMa TaeJaSTaeJaiSvNaaMahMa( )

JaYaae_iSMa VYavSaaYaae_iSMa Satv& SatvvTaaMahMa( )) 36 ))

dyütaà chalayatäm asmi
tejas tejasvinäm aham
jayo ’smi vyavasäyo ’smi
sattvaà sattvavatäm aham

SYNONYMS

dyütam—gambling; chalayatäm—of all cheats; asmi—I am; tejaù—the
splendor; tejasvinäm—of everything splendid; aham—I am; jayaù—victory;
asmi—I am; vyavasäyaù—enterprise or adventure; asmi—I am; sattvam—the
strength; sattva-vatäm—of the strong; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the splendor. I am

victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of the strong.

PURPORT

There  are  many  kinds  of  cheaters  all  over  the  universe.  Of  all  cheating
processes,  gambling  stands  supreme  and  therefore  represents  Kåñëa.  As  the
Supreme, Kåñëa can be more deceitful than any mere man. If Kåñëa chooses to
deceive  a  person,  no  one  can  surpass  Him  in  His  deceit.  His  greatness  is  not
simply one-sided—it is all-sided.

Among  the  victorious,  He  is  victory.  He  is  the  splendor  of  the  splendid.
Among the enterprising and industrious, He is the most enterprising, the most
industrious.  Among  adventurers  He  is  the  most  adventurous,  and  among  the
strong  He  is  the  strongest.  When  Kåñëa  was  present  on  earth,  no  one  could
surpass Him in strength. Even in His childhood He lifted Govardhana Hill. No
one can surpass Him in cheating, no one can surpass Him in splendor, no one
can surpass Him in victory, no one can surpass Him in enterprise, and no one
can surpass Him in strength.

TEXT  37

v*Z<aqNaa& vaSaudevae_iSMa Paa<@vaNaa& DaNaÅYa" )

MauNaqNaaMaPYah& VYaaSa" k-vqNaaMauXaNaa k-iv" )) 37 ))

våñëénäà väsudevo ’smi
päëòavänäà dhanaïjayaù
munénäm apy ahaà vyäsaù
kavénäm uçanä kaviù

SYNONYMS

våñëénäm—of the descendants of Våñëi; väsudevaù—Kåñëa in Dvärakä;
asmi—I am; päëòavänäm—of the Päëòavas; dhanaïjayaù—Arjuna;
munénäm—of the sages; api—also; aham—I am; vyäsaù—Vyäsa, the compiler
of all Vedic literature; kavénäm—of all great thinkers; uçanä—Uçanä;
kaviù—the thinker.

TRANSLATION

Of the descendants of Våñëi I am Väsudeva, and of the Päëòavas I am

Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyäsa, and among great thinkers I am Uçanä.

PURPORT

Kåñëa  is  the  original  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  Baladeva  is
Kåñëa’s immediate expansion. Both Lord Kåñëa and Baladeva appeared as sons
of Vasudeva, so both of Them may be called Väsudeva. From another point of
view,  because  Kåñëa  never  leaves  Våndävana,  all  the  forms  of  Kåñëa  that
appear  elsewhere  are  His  expansions.  Väsudeva  is  Kåñëa’s  immediate
expansion, so Väsudeva is not different from Kåñëa. It is to be understood that
the  Väsudeva  referred  to  in  this  verse  of  Bhagavad-gétä  is  Baladeva,  or
Balaräma, because He is the original source of all incarnations and thus He is
the sole source of Väsudeva. The immediate expansions of the Lord are called
sväàça  (personal  expansions),  and  there  are  also  expansions  called
vibhinnäàça (separated expansions).

Amongst the sons of Päëòu, Arjuna is famous as Dhanaïjaya. He is the best
of  men  and  therefore  represents  Kåñëa.  Among  the  munis,  or  learned  men
conversant  in  Vedic  knowledge,  Vyäsa  is  the  greatest  because  he  explained
Vedic knowledge in many different ways for the understanding of the common
mass of people in this Age of Kali. And Vyäsa is also known as an incarnation
of  Kåñëa;  therefore  Vyäsa  also  represents  Kåñëa.  Kavis  are  those  who  are
capable  of  thinking  thoroughly  on  any  subject  matter.  Among  the  kavis,
Uçanä,  Çukräcärya,  was  the  spiritual  master  of  the  demons;  he  was  an
extremely  intelligent  and  far-seeing  politician.  Thus  Çukräcärya  is  another
representative of the opulence of Kåñëa.

TEXT  38

d<@ae dMaYaTaaMaiSMa NaqiTariSMa iJaGaqzTaaMa( )

MaaENa& cEvaiSMa GauùaNaa& jaNa& jaNavTaaMahMa( )) 38 ))

daëòo damayatäm asmi
nétir asmi jigéñatäm
maunaà caiväsmi guhyänäà
jïänaà jïänavatäm aham

SYNONYMS

daëòaù—punishment; damayatäm—of all means of suppression; asmi—I am;
nétiù—morality; asmi—I am; jigéñatäm—of those who seek victory;
maunam—silence; ca—and; eva—also; asmi—I am; guhyänäm—of secrets;
jïänam—knowledge; jïäna-vatäm—of the wise; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Among all means of suppressing lawlessness I am punishment, and of those
who seek victory I am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise I
am the wisdom.

PURPORT

There are many suppressing agents, of which the most important are those
that  cut  down  miscreants.  When  miscreants  are  punished,  the  agency  of
chastisement represents Kåñëa. Among those who are trying to be victorious in
some  field  of  activity,  the  most  victorious  element  is  morality.  Among  the
confidential  activities  of  hearing,  thinking  and  meditating,  silence  is  most
important  because  by  silence  one  can  make  progress  very  quickly.  The  wise
man  is  he  who  can  discriminate  between  matter  and  spirit,  between  God’s
superior and inferior natures. Such knowledge is Kåñëa Himself.

TEXT  39

YaÀaiPa SavR>aUTaaNaa& bqJa& TadhMaJauRNa )

Na TadiSTa ivNaa YaTSYaaNMaYaa >aUTa& cracrMa( )) 39 ))

yac cäpi sarva-bhütänäà
béjaà tad aham arjuna
na tad asti vinä yat syän
mayä bhütaà caräcaram

SYNONYMS

yat—whatever; ca—also; api—may be; sarva-bhütänäm—of all creations;
béjam—seed; tat—that; aham—I am; arjuna—O Arjuna; na—not; tat—that;
asti—there is; vinä—without; yat—which; syät—exists; mayä—Me;
bhütam—created being; cara-acaram—moving and nonmoving.

TRANSLATION

Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences. There is

no being—moving or nonmoving—that can exist without Me.

PURPORT

Everything  has  a  cause,  and  that  cause  or  seed  of  manifestation  is  Kåñëa.
Without Kåñëa’s energy, nothing can exist; therefore He is called omnipotent.
Without  His  potency,  neither  the  movable  nor  the  immovable  can  exist.
Whatever  existence  is  not  founded  on  the  energy  of  Kåñëa  is  called  mäyä,
“that which is not.”

TEXT  40

NaaNTaae_iSTa MaMa idVYaaNaa& iv>aUTaqNaa& ParNTaPa )

Wz TaUÕeXaTa" Pa[ae¢-ae iv>aUTaeivRSTarae MaYaa )) 40 ))

nänto ’sti mama divyänäà
vibhüténäà parantapa
eña tüddeçataù prokto
vibhüter vistaro mayä

SYNONYMS

na—nor; antaù—a limit; asti—there is; mama—My; divyänäm—of the divine;
vibhüténäm—opulences; parantapa—O conqueror of the enemies; eñaù—all
this; tu—but; uddeçataù—as examples; proktaù—spoken; vibhüteù—of
opulences; vistaraù—the expanse; mayä—by Me.

TRANSLATION

O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine manifestations.

What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication of My infinite opulences.

PURPORT

As  stated  in  the  Vedic  literature,  although  the  opulences  and  energies  of

the  Supreme  are  understood  in  various  ways,  there  is  no  limit  to  such
opulences;  therefore  not  all  the  opulences  and  energies  can  be  explained.
Simply  a  few  examples  are  being  described  to  Arjuna  to  pacify  his
inquisitiveness.

TEXT  41

YaÛiÜ>aUiTaMaTSatv& é[qMadUiJaRTaMaev va )

TatadevavGaC^ Tv& MaMa TaeJaae_&XaSaM>avMa( )) 41 ))

yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà
çrémad ürjitam eva vä
tat tad evävagaccha tvaà
mama tejo-’àça-sambhavam

SYNONYMS

yat yat—whatever; vibhüti—opulences; mat—having; sattvam—existence;
çré-mat—beautiful; ürjitam—glorious; eva—certainly; vä—or; tat tat—all
those; eva—certainly; avagaccha—must know; tvam—you; mama—My;
tejaù—of the splendor; aàça—a part; sambhavam—born of.

TRANSLATION

Know that all opulent, beautiful and glorious creations spring from but a

spark of My splendor.

PURPORT

Any  glorious  or  beautiful  existence  should  be  understood  to  be  but  a
fragmental manifestation of Kåñëa’s opulence, whether it be in the spiritual or
material  world.  Anything  extraordinarily  opulent  should  be  considered  to
represent Kåñëa’s opulence.

TEXT  42

AQava bhuNaETaeNa ik&- jaTaeNa TavaJauRNa )

iví>YaahiMad& k*-TòMaek-a&XaeNa iSQaTaae JaGaTa( )) 42 ))

atha vä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
ekäàçena sthito jagat

SYNONYMS

atha vä—or; bahunä—many; etena—by this kind; kim—what; jïätena—by
knowing; tava—your; arjuna—O Arjuna; viñöabhya—pervading; aham—I;
idam—this; kåtsnam—entire; eka—by one; aàçena—part; sthitaù—am
situated; jagat—universe.

TRANSLATION

But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a

single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord is represented throughout the entire material universes
by  His  entering  into  all  things  as  the  Supersoul.  The  Lord  here  tells  Arjuna
that  there  is  no  point  in  understanding  how  things  exist  in  their  separate
opulence  and  grandeur.  He  should  know  that  all  things  are  existing  due  to
Kåñëa’s entering them as Supersoul. From Brahmä, the most gigantic entity, on
down  to  the  smallest  ant,  all  are  existing  because  the  Lord  has  entered  each
and all and is sustaining them.

There  is  a  Mission  that  regularly  propounds  that  worship  of  any  demigod
will lead one to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or the supreme goal. But
worship  of  demigods  is  thoroughly  discouraged  herein  because  even  the

greatest demigods like Brahmä and Çiva represent only part of the opulence of
the  Supreme  Lord.  He  is  the  origin  of  everyone  born,  and  no  one  is  greater
than Him. He is asamaurdhva, which means that no one is superior to Him and
that  no  one  is  equal  to  Him.  In  the  Padma  Puräëa  it  is  said  that  one  who
considers  the  Supreme  Lord  Kåñëa  in  the  same  category  with  demigods—be
they  even  Brahmä  or  Çiva—becomes  at  once  an  atheist.  If,  however,  one
thoroughly studies the different descriptions of the opulences and expansions
of Kåñëa’s energy, then one can understand without any doubt the position of
Lord  Çré  Kåñëa  and  can  fix  his  mind  in  the  worship  of  Kåñëa  without
deviation.  The  Lord  is  all-pervading  by  the  expansion  of  His  partial
representation,  the  Supersoul,  who  enters  into  everything  that  is.  Pure
devotees,  therefore,  concentrate  their  minds  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  in  full
devotional  service;  therefore  they  are  always  situated  in  the  transcendental
position. Devotional service and worship of Kåñëa are very clearly indicated in
this chapter in verses eight through eleven. That is the way of pure devotional
service.  How  one  can  attain  the  highest  devotional  perfection  of  association
with  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  has  been  thoroughly  explained  in
this  chapter.  Çréla  Baladeva  Vidyäbhüñaëa,  a  great  äcärya  in  disciplic
succession from Kåñëa, concludes his commentary on this chapter by saying,

yac-chakti-leçät suryädyä
bhavanty aty-ugra-tejasaù
yad-aàçena dhåtaà viçvaà
sa kåñëo daçame ’rcyate

From Lord Kåñëa’s potent energy even the powerful sun gets its power, and
by  Kåñëa’s  partial  expansion  the  whole  world  is  maintained.  Therefore  Lord
Çré Kåñëa is worshipable.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Tenth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of the Opulence of the Absolute.

- CHAPTER 11 -
The Universal Form

TEXT  1

AJauRNa ovac

MadNauGa]haYa ParMa& GauùMaDYaaTMaSa&ijTaMa( )

YatvYaae¢&- vcSTaeNa Maaehae_Ya& ivGaTaae MaMa )) 1 ))

arjuna uväca
mad-anugrahäya paramaà
guhyam adhyätma-saàjïitam
yat tvayoktaà vacas tena
moho ’yaà vigato mama

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; mat-anugrahäya—just to show me favor;
paramam—supreme; guhyam—confidential subject; adhyätma—spiritual;
saàjïitam—in the matter of; yat—what; tvayä—by You; uktam—said;
vacaù—words; tena—by that; mohaù—illusion; ayam—this; vigataù—is
removed; mama—my.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: By my hearing the instructions You have kindly given me about

these most confidential spiritual subjects, my illusion has now been dispelled.

PURPORT

This chapter reveals Kåñëa as the cause of all causes. He is even the cause of
the Mahä-Viñëu, from whom the material universes emanate. Kåñëa is not an
incarnation;  He  is  the  source  of  all  incarnations.  That  has  been  completely
explained in the last chapter.

Now,  as  far  as  Arjuna  is  concerned,  he  says  that  his  illusion  is  over.  This
means  that  Arjuna  no  longer  thinks  of  Kåñëa  as  a  mere  human  being,  as  a
friend of his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is very enlightened and is
glad  that  he  has  such  a  great  friend  as  Kåñëa,  but  now  he  is  thinking  that
although he may accept Kåñëa as the source of everything, others may not. So
in  order  to  establish  Kåñëa’s  divinity  for  all,  he  is  requesting  Kåñëa  in  this
chapter to show His universal form. Actually when one sees the universal form
of Kåñëa one becomes frightened, like Arjuna, but Kåñëa is so kind that after
showing it He converts Himself again into His original form. Arjuna agrees to
what Kåñëa has several times said: Kåñëa is speaking to him just for his benefit.
So Arjuna acknowledges that all this is happening to him by Kåñëa’s grace. He
is  now  convinced  that  Kåñëa  is  the  cause  of  all  causes  and  is  present  in
everyone’s heart as the Supersoul.

TEXT  2

>avaPYaYaaE ih >aUTaaNaa& é[uTaaE ivSTarXaae MaYaa )

Tvta" k-Mal/Pa}aa+a MaahaTMYaMaiPa caVYaYaMa( )) 2 ))

bhaväpyayau hi bhütänäà
çrutau vistaraço mayä
tvattaù kamala-paträkña
mähätmyam api cävyayam

SYNONYMS

bhava—appearance; apyayau—disappearance; hi—certainly; bhütänäm—of all
living entities; çrutau—have been heard; vistaraçaù—in detail; mayä—by me;
tvattaù—from You; kamala-patra-akña—O lotus-eyed one;

mähätmyam—glories; api—also; ca—and; avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

O lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance and

disappearance of every living entity and have realized Your inexhaustible
glories.

PURPORT

Arjuna  addresses  Lord  Kåñëa  as  “lotus-eyed”  (Kåñëa’s  eyes  appear  just  like
the  petals  of  a  lotus  flower)  out  of  his  joy,  for  Kåñëa  has  assured  him,  in  the
previous  chapter,  ahaà  kåtsnasya  jagataù  prabhavaù  pralayas  tathä:  “I  am  the
source  of  the  appearance  and  disappearance  of  this  entire  material
manifestation.”  Arjuna  has  heard  of  this  from  the  Lord  in  detail.  Arjuna
further  knows  that  in  spite  of  His  being  the  source  of  all  appearances  and
disappearances,  He  is  aloof  from  them.  As  the  Lord  has  said  in  the  Ninth
Chapter,  He  is  all-pervading,  yet  He  is  not  personally  present  everywhere.
That is the inconceivable opulence of Kåñëa which Arjuna admits that he has
thoroughly understood.

TEXT  3

WvMaeTaÛQaaTQa TvMaaTMaaNa& ParMaeìr )

d]íuiMaC^aiMa Tae æPaMaEìr& PauåzaetaMa )) 3 ))

evam etad yathättha tvam
ätmänaà parameçvara
drañöum icchämi te rüpam
aiçvaraà puruñottama

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; etat—this; yathä—as it is; ättha—have spoken; tvam—You;

ätmänam—Yourself; parama-éçvara—O Supreme Lord; drañöum—to see;
icchämi—I wish; te—Your; rüpam—form; aiçvaram—divine;
puruña-uttama—O best of personalities.

TRANSLATION

O greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see You here before

me in Your actual position, as You have described Yourself, I wish to see how
You have entered into this cosmic manifestation. I want to see that form of
Yours.

PURPORT

The  Lord  said  that  because  He  entered  into  the  material  universe  by  His
personal representation, the cosmic manifestation has been made possible and
is going on. Now as far as Arjuna is concerned, he is inspired by the statements
of  Kåñëa,  but  in  order  to  convince  others  in  the  future  who  may  think  that
Kåñëa  is  an  ordinary  person,  Arjuna  desires  to  see  Him  actually  in  His
universal form, to see how He is acting from within the universe, although He
is apart from it. Arjuna’s addressing the Lord as puruñottama is also significant.
Since  the  Lord  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  He  is  present  within
Arjuna  himself;  therefore  He  knows  the  desire  of  Arjuna,  and  He  can
understand that Arjuna has no special desire to see Him in His universal form,
for  Arjuna  is  completely  satisfied  to  see  Him  in  His  personal  form  of  Kåñëa.
But the Lord can understand also that Arjuna wants to see the universal form
to convince others. Arjuna did not have any personal desire for confirmation.
Kåñëa  also  understands  that  Arjuna  wants  to  see  the  universal  form  to  set  a
criterion, for in the future there would be so many imposters who would pose
themselves  as  incarnations  of  God.  The  people,  therefore,  should  be  careful;
one who claims to be Kåñëa should be prepared to show his universal form to
confirm his claim to the people.

TEXT  4

MaNYaSae Yaid TaC^KYa& MaYaa d]íuiMaiTa Pa[>aae )

YaaeGaeìr TaTaae Mae Tv& dXaRYaaTMaaNaMaVYaYaMa( )) 4 ))

manyase yadi tac chakyaà
mayä drañöum iti prabho
yogeçvara tato me tvaà
darçayätmänam avyayam

SYNONYMS

manyase—You think; yadi—if; tat—that; çakyam—is able; mayä—by me;
drañöum—to be seen; iti—thus; prabho—O Lord; yoga-éçvara—O Lord of all
mystic power; tataù—then; me—unto me; tvam—You; darçaya—show;
ätmänam—Your Self; avyayam—eternal.

TRANSLATION

If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O
master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that unlimited universal Self.

PURPORT

It  is  said  that  one  can  neither  see,  hear,  understand  nor  perceive  the
Supreme  Lord,  Kåñëa,  by  the  material  senses.  But  if  one  is  engaged  in  loving
transcendental  service  to  the  Lord  from the beginning, then one can see the
Lord by revelation. Every living entity is only a spiritual spark; therefore it is
not possible to see or to understand the Supreme Lord. Arjuna, as a devotee,
does not depend on his speculative strength; rather, he admits his limitations
as a living entity and acknowledges Kåñëa’s inestimable position. Arjuna could
understand  that  for  a  living  entity  it  is  not  possible  to  understand  the
unlimited  infinite.  If  the  infinite  reveals  Himself,  then  it  is  possible  to
understand  the  nature  of  the  infinite  by  the  grace  of  the  infinite.  The  word
yogeçvara  is  also  very  significant  here  because  the  Lord  has  inconceivable
power.  If  He  likes,  He  can  reveal  Himself  by  His  grace,  although  He  is

unlimited. Therefore Arjuna pleads for the inconceivable grace of Kåñëa. He
does not give Kåñëa orders. Kåñëa is not obliged to reveal Himself unless one
surrenders  fully  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  engages  in  devotional  service.
Thus it is not possible for persons who depend on the strength of their mental
speculations to see Kåñëa.

TEXT  5

é[q>aGavaNauvac

PaXYa Mae PaaQaR æPaai<a XaTaXaae_Qa SahóXa" )

NaaNaaivDaaiNa idVYaaiNa NaaNaav<aaRk*-TaqiNa c )) 5 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
paçya me pärtha rüpäëi
çataço ’tha sahasraçaù
nänä-vidhäni divyäni
nänä-varëäkåténi ca

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; paçya—just
see; me—My; pärtha—O son of Påthä; rüpäëi—forms; çataçaù—hundreds;
atha—also; sahasraçaù—thousands; nänä-vidhäni—variegated;
divyäni—divine; nänä—variegated; varëa—colors; äkåténi—forms; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Påthä,
see now My opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine and multicolored
forms.

PURPORT

Arjuna  wanted  to  see  Kåñëa  in  His  universal  form,  which,  although  a

transcendental  form,  is  just  manifested  for  the  cosmic  manifestation  and  is
therefore  subject  to  the  temporary  time  of  this  material  nature.  As  the
material nature is manifested and not manifested, similarly this universal form
of  Kåñëa  is  manifested  and  nonmanifested.  It  is  not  eternally  situated  in  the
spiritual  sky  like  Kåñëa’s  other  forms.  As  far  as  a  devotee  is  concerned,  he  is
not eager to see the universal form, but because Arjuna wanted to see Kåñëa in
this way, Kåñëa reveals this form. This universal form is not possible to be seen
by any ordinary man. Kåñëa must give one the power to see it.

TEXT  6

PaXYaaidTYaaNvSaUNåd]aNaiìNaaE MaåTaSTaQaa )

bhUNYad*íPaUvaRi<a PaXYaaêYaaRi<a >aarTa )) 6 ))

paçyädityän vasün rudrän
açvinau marutas tathä
bahüny adåñöa-pürväëi
paçyäçcaryäëi bhärata

SYNONYMS

paçya—see; ädityän—the twelve sons of Aditi; vasün—the eight Vasus;
rudrän—the eleven forms of Rudra; açvinau—the two Açvinés; marutaù—the
forty-nine Maruts (demigods of the wind); tathä—also; bahüni—many;
adåñöa—that you have not seen; pürväëi—before; paçya—see; äçcaryäëi—all
the wonders; bhärata—O best of the Bhäratas.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Bhäratas, see here the different manifestations of Ädityas,
Vasus, Rudras, Açviné-kumäras and all the other demigods. Behold the many
wonderful things which no one has ever seen or heard of before.

PURPORT

Even though Arjuna was a personal friend of Kåñëa and the most advanced
of  learned  men,  it  was  still  not  possible  for  him  to  know  everything  about
Kåñëa. Here it is stated that humans have neither heard nor known of all these
forms and manifestations. Now Kåñëa reveals these wonderful forms.

TEXT  7

whEk-SQa& JaGaTk*-Tò& PaXYaaÛ SacracrMa( )

MaMa dehe Gau@ake-Xa YaÀaNYad(d]íuiMaC^iSa )) 7 ))

ihaika-sthaà jagat kåtsnaà
paçyädya sa-caräcaram
mama dehe guòäkeça
yac cänyad drañöum icchasi

SYNONYMS

iha—in this; eka-stham—in one place; jagat—the universe;
kåtsnam—completely; paçya—see; adya—immediately; sa—with; cara—the
moving; acaram—and not moving; mama—My; dehe—in this body;
guòäkeça—O Arjuna; yat—that which; ca—also; anyat—other; drañöum—to
see; icchasi—you wish.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, whatever you wish to see, behold at once in this body of Mine!
This universal form can show you whatever you now desire to see and whatever
you may want to see in the future. Everything—moving and nonmoving—is
here completely, in one place.

PURPORT

No  one  can  see  the  entire  universe  while  sitting  in  one  place.  Even  the
most  advanced  scientist  cannot  see  what  is  going  on  in  other  parts  of  the

universe. But a devotee like Arjuna can see everything that exists in any part
of  the  universe.  Kåñëa  gives  him  the  power  to  see  anything  he  wants  to  see,
past,  present  and  future.  Thus  by  the  mercy  of  Kåñëa,  Arjuna  is  able  to  see
everything.

TEXT  8

Na Tau Maa& XaKYaSae d]íuMaNaeNaEv Svc+auza )

idVYa& ddaiMa Tae c+au" PaXYa Mae YaaeGaMaEìrMa( )) 8 ))

na tu mäà çakyase drañöum
anenaiva sva-cakñuñä
divyaà dadämi te cakñuù
paçya me yogam aiçvaram

SYNONYMS

na—never; tu—but; mäm—Me; çakyase—are able; drañöum—to see;
anena—with these; eva—certainly; sva-cakñuñä—your own eyes;
divyam—divine; dadämi—I give; te—to you; cakñuù—eyes; paçya—see;
me—My; yogam aiçvaram—inconceivable mystic power.

TRANSLATION

But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you divine

eyes. Behold My mystic opulence!

PURPORT

A pure devotee does not like to see Kåñëa in any form except His form with
two  hands;  a  devotee  must  see  His  universal  form  by  His  grace,  not  with  the
mind but with spiritual eyes. To see the universal form of Kåñëa, Arjuna is told
not to change his mind but his vision. The universal form of Kåñëa is not very
important; that will be clear in subsequent verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted

to see it, the Lord gives him the particular vision required to see that universal
form.

Devotees  who  are  correctly  situated  in  a  transcendental  relationship  with
Kåñëa  are  attracted  by  loving  features,  not  by  a  godless  display  of  opulences.
The playmates of Kåñëa, the friends of Kåñëa and the parents of Kåñëa never
want  Kåñëa  to  show  His  opulences.  They  are  so  immersed  in  pure  love  that
they do not even know that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In
their  loving  exchange  they  forget  that  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Lord.  In  the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is stated that the boys who play with Kåñëa are all highly
pious souls and after many, many births they are able to play with Kåñëa. Such
boys  do  not  know  that  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  They
take Him as a personal friend. Therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé recites this verse:

itthaà satäà brahma-sukhänubhütyä
däsyaà gatänäà para-daivatena
mäyäçritänäà nara-därakeëa
säkaà vijahruù kåta-puëya-puïjäù

“Here is the Supreme Person, who is considered the impersonal Brahman by
great sages, the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotees, and a product of
material nature by ordinary men. Now these boys, who have performed many,
many  pious  activities  in  their  past  lives,  are  playing  with  that  Supreme
Personality of Godhead.” (Çrémad-Bhägavatam 10.12.11)

The fact is that the devotee is not concerned with seeing the viçva-rüpa, the
universal form, but Arjuna wanted to see it to substantiate Kåñëa’s statements
so that in the future people could understand that Kåñëa not only theoretically
or  philosophically  presented  Himself  as  the  Supreme  but  actually  presented
Himself  as  such  to  Arjuna.  Arjuna  must  confirm  this  because  Arjuna  is  the
beginning  of  the  paramparä  system.  Those  who  are  actually  interested  in
understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and who follow in
the  footsteps  of  Arjuna  should  understand  that  Kåñëa  not  only  theoretically
presented  Himself  as  the  Supreme,  but  actually  revealed  Himself  as  the
Supreme.

The  Lord  gave  Arjuna  the  necessary  power  to  see  His  universal  form

because  He  knew  that  Arjuna  did  not  particularly  want  to  see  it,  as  we  have
already explained.

TEXT  9

SaÅYa ovac

WvMau¤-a TaTaae raJaNMahaYaaeGaeìrae hir" )

dXaRYaaMaaSa PaaQaaRYa ParMa& æPaMaEìrMa( )) 9 ))

saïjaya uväca
evam uktvä tato räjan
mahä-yogeçvaro hariù
darçayäm äsa pärthäya
paramaà rüpam aiçvaram

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; evam—thus; uktvä—saying; tataù—thereafter;
räjan—O King; mahä-yoga-éçvaraù—the most powerful mystic; hariù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa; darçayäm äsa—showed;
pärthäya—unto Arjuna; paramam—the divine; rüpam aiçvaram—universal
form.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said: O King, having spoken thus, the Supreme Lord of all mystic

power, the Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal form to Arjuna.

TEXTS

 10–11

ANaek-v£-NaYaNaMaNaek-ad(>auTadXaRNaMa( )

ANaek-idVYaa>ar<a& idVYaaNaek-aeÛTaaYauDaMa( )) 10 ))

idVYaMaaLYaaMbrDar& idVYaGaNDaaNaule/PaNaMa( )

SavaRêYaRMaYa& devMaNaNTa& ivìTaaeMau%Ma( )) 11 ))

aneka-vaktra-nayanam
anekädbhuta-darçanam
aneka-divyäbharaëaà
divyänekodyatäyudham

divya-mälyämbara-dharaà
divya-gandhänulepanam
sarväçcarya-mayaà devam
anantaà viçvato-mukham

SYNONYMS

aneka—various; vaktra—mouths; nayanam—eyes; aneka—various;
adbhuta—wonderful; darçanam—sights; aneka—many; divya—divine;
äbharaëam—ornaments; divya—divine; aneka—various; udyata—uplifted;
äyudham—weapons; divya—divine; mälya—garlands; ambara—dresses;
dharam—wearing; divya—divine; gandha—fragrances; anulepanam—smeared
with; sarva—all; äçcarya-mayam—wonderful; devam—shining;
anantam—unlimited; viçvataù-mukham—all-pervading.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths, unlimited eyes,
unlimited wonderful visions. The form was decorated with many celestial
ornaments and bore many divine upraised weapons. He wore celestial garlands
and garments, and many divine scents were smeared over His body. All was
wondrous, brilliant, unlimited, all-expanding.

PURPORT

In these two verses the repeated use of the word many indicates that there
was  no  limit  to  the  number  of  hands,  mouths,  legs  and  other  manifestations
Arjuna  was  seeing.  These  manifestations  were  distributed  throughout  the

universe, but by the grace of the Lord, Arjuna could see them while sitting in
one place. That was due to the inconceivable potency of Kåñëa.

TEXT  12

idiv SaUYaRSahóSYa >aveÛuGaPaduiTQaTaa )

Yaid >aa" Sad*Xaq Saa SYaaÙaSaSTaSYa MahaTMaNa" )) 12 ))

divi sürya-sahasrasya
bhaved yugapad utthitä
yadi bhäù sadåçé sä syäd
bhäsas tasya mahätmanaù

SYNONYMS

divi—in the sky; sürya—of suns; sahasrasya—of many thousands;
bhavet—there were; yugapat—simultaneously; utthitä—present; yadi—if;
bhäù—light; sadåçé—like that; sä—that; syät—might be; bhäsaù—effulgence;
tasya—of Him; mahä-ätmanaù—the great Lord.

TRANSLATION

If hundreds of thousands of suns were to rise at once into the sky, their
radiance might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal
form.

PURPORT

What Arjuna saw was indescribable, yet Saïjaya is trying to give a mental
picture  of  that  great  revelation  to  Dhåtaräñöra.  Neither  Saïjaya  nor
Dhåtaräñöra  was  present,  but  Saïjaya,  by  the  grace  of  Vyäsa,  could  see
whatever  happened.  Thus  he  now  compares  the  situation,  as  far  as  it  can  be
understood, to an imaginable phenomenon (i.e., thousands of suns).

TEXT  13

Ta}aEk-SQa& JaGaTk*-Tò& Pa[iv>a¢-MaNaek-Daa )

APaXYaÕevdevSYa Xarqre Paa<@vSTada )) 13 ))

tatraika-sthaà jagat kåtsnaà
pravibhaktam anekadhä
apaçyad deva-devasya
çarére päëòavas tadä

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; eka-stham—in one place; jagat—the universe;
kåtsnam—complete; pravibhaktam—divided; anekadhä—into many;
apaçyat—could see; deva-devasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
çarére—in the universal form; päëòavaù—Arjuna; tadä—at that time.

TRANSLATION

At that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the

unlimited expansions of the universe situated in one place although divided into
many, many thousands.

PURPORT

The  word  tatra  (“there”)  is  very  significant.  It  indicates  that  both  Arjuna
and  Kåñëa  were  sitting  on  the  chariot  when  Arjuna  saw  the  universal  form.
Others  on  the  battlefield  could  not  see  this  form,  because  Kåñëa  gave  the
vision only to Arjuna. Arjuna could see in the body of Kåñëa many thousands
of  planets.  As  we  learn  from  Vedic  scriptures,  there  are  many  universes  and
many  planets.  Some  of  them  are  made of earth, some are made of gold, some
are made of jewels, some are very great, some are not so great, etc. Sitting on
his chariot, Arjuna could see all these. But no one could understand what was
going on between Arjuna and Kåñëa.

TEXT  14

TaTa" Sa ivSMaYaaivíae ôíraeMaa DaNaÅYa" )

Pa[<aMYa iXarSaa dev& k*-TaaÅil/r>aazTa )) 14 ))

tataù sa vismayäviñöo
håñöa-romä dhanaïjayaù
praëamya çirasä devaà
kåtäïjalir abhäñata

SYNONYMS

tataù—thereafter; saù—he; vismaya-äviñöaù—being overwhelmed with
wonder; håñöa-romä—with his bodily hairs standing on end due to his great
ecstasy; dhanaïjayaù—Arjuna; praëamya—offering obeisances; çirasä—with
the head; devam—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kåta-aïjaliù—with
folded hands; abhäñata—began to speak.

TRANSLATION

Then, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna bowed
his head to offer obeisances and with folded hands began to pray to the Supreme
Lord.

PURPORT

Once  the  divine  vision  is  revealed,  the  relationship  between  Kåñëa  and
Arjuna  changes  immediately.  Before,  Kåñëa  and  Arjuna  had  a  relationship
based  on  friendship,  but  here,  after  the  revelation,  Arjuna  is  offering
obeisances  with  great  respect,  and  with  folded  hands  he  is  praying  to  Kåñëa.
He is praising the universal form. Thus Arjuna’s relationship becomes one of
wonder rather than friendship. Great devotees see Kåñëa as the reservoir of all
relationships.  In  the  scriptures  there  are  twelve  basic  kinds  of  relationships

mentioned, and all of them are present in Kåñëa. It is said that He is the ocean
of  all  the  relationships  exchanged  between  two  living  entities,  between  the
gods, or between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.

Here  Arjuna  was  inspired  by  the  relationship  of  wonder,  and  in  that
wonder,  although  he  was  by  nature  very  sober,  calm  and  quiet,  he  became
ecstatic,  his  hair  stood  up,  and  he  began  to  offer  his  obeisances  unto  the
Supreme  Lord  with  folded  hands.  He  was  not,  of  course,  afraid.  He  was
affected  by  the  wonders  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  immediate  context  is
wonder;  his  natural  loving  friendship  was  overwhelmed  by  wonder,  and  thus
he reacted in this way.

TEXT  15

AJauRNa ovac

PaXYaaiMa deva&STav dev dehe

 Sava|STaQaa >aUTaivXaezSaºaNa( )

b]øa<aMaqXa& k-Mal/aSaNaSQa‚

 Ma*zq&ê SavaRNaurGaa&ê idVYaaNa( )) 15 ))

arjuna uväca
paçyämi deväàs tava deva dehe
sarväàs tathä bhüta-viçeña-saìghän
brahmäëam éçaà kamaläsana-stham
åñéàç ca sarvän uragäàç ca divyän

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; paçyämi—I see; devän—all the demigods;
tava—Your; deva—O Lord; dehe—in the body; sarvän—all; tathä—also;
bhüta—living entities; viçeña-saìghän—specifically assembled;
brahmäëam—Lord Brahmä; éçam—Lord Çiva; kamala-äsana-stham—sitting on
the lotus flower; åñén—great sages; ca—also; sarvän—all; uragän—serpents;
ca—also; divyän—divine.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: My dear Lord Kåñëa, I see assembled in Your body all the
demigods and various other living entities. I see Brahmä sitting on the lotus
flower, as well as Lord Çiva and all the sages and divine serpents.

PURPORT

Arjuna  sees  everything  in  the  universe;  therefore  he  sees  Brahmä,  who  is
the  first  creature  in  the  universe,  and  the  celestial  serpent  upon  which  the
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu lies in the lower regions of the universe. This snake bed
is called Väsuki. There are also other snakes known as Väsuki. Arjuna can see
from the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu up to the topmost part of the universe on the
lotus-flower  planet  where  Brahmä,  the  first  creature  of  the  universe,  resides.
That means that from the beginning to the end, everything could be seen by
Arjuna, who was sitting in one place on his chariot. This was possible by the
grace of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa.

TEXT  16

ANaek-bahUdrv£-Nae}a&

 PaXYaaiMa Tva& SavRTaae_NaNTaæPaMa( )

NaaNTa& Na MaDYa& Na PauNaSTavaid&

 PaXYaaiMa ivìeìr ivìæPa )) 16 ))

aneka-bähüdara-vaktra-netraà
paçyämi tväà sarvato ’nanta-rüpam
näntaà na madhyaà na punas tavädià
paçyämi viçveçvara viçva-rüpa

SYNONYMS

aneka—many; bähu—arms; udara—bellies; vaktra—mouths; netram—eyes;

paçyämi—I see; tväm—You; sarvataù—on all sides; ananta-rüpam—unlimited
form; na antam—no end; na madhyam—no middle; na punaù—nor again;
tava—Your; ädim—beginning; paçyämi—I see; viçva-éçvara—O Lord of the
universe; viçva-rüpa—in the form of the universe.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of the universe, O universal form, I see in Your body many, many
arms, bellies, mouths and eyes, expanded everywhere, without limit. I see in
You no end, no middle and no beginning.

PURPORT

Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  is  unlimited;  thus

through Him everything could be seen.

TEXT  17

ik-rqi$=Na& GaidNa& ci§-<a& c

 TaeJaaeraiXa& SavRTaae dqiáMaNTaMa( )

PaXYaaiMa Tva& duiNaRrq+Ya& SaMaNTaa‚

 ÕqáaNal/akR-ÛuiTaMaPa[MaeYaMa( )) 17 ))

kiréöinaà gadinaà cakriëaà ca
tejo-räçià sarvato déptimantam
paçyämi tväà durnirékñyaà samantäd
déptänalärka-dyutim aprameyam

SYNONYMS

kiréöinam—with helmets; gadinam—with maces; cakriëam—with discs;
ca—and; tejaù-räçim—effulgence; sarvataù—on all sides;
dépti-mantam—glowing; paçyämi—I see; tväm—You; durnirékñyam—difficult
to see; samantät—everywhere; dépta-anala—blazing fire; arka—of the sun;

dyutim—the sunshine; aprameyam—immeasurable.

TRANSLATION

Your form is difficult to see because of its glaring effulgence, spreading on all

sides, like blazing fire or the immeasurable radiance of the sun. Yet I see this
glowing form everywhere, adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs.

TEXT  18

TvMa+ar& ParMa& veidTaVYa&

 TvMaSYa ivìSYa Par& iNaDaaNaMa( )

TvMaVYaYa" XaaìTaDaMaRGaaeáa

 SaNaaTaNaSTv& Pauåzae MaTaae Mae )) 18 ))

tvam akñaraà paramaà veditavyaà
tvam asya viçvasya paraà nidhänam
tvam avyayaù çäçvata-dharma-goptä
sanätanas tvaà puruño mato me

SYNONYMS

tvam—You; akñaram—the infallible; paramam—supreme; veditavyam—to be
understood; tvam—You; asya—of this; viçvasya—universe; param—supreme;
nidhänam—basis; tvam—You; avyayaù—inexhaustible;
çäçvata-dharma-goptä—maintainer of the eternal religion; sanätanaù—eternal;
tvam—You; puruñaù—the Supreme Personality; mataù me—this is my opinion.

TRANSLATION

You are the supreme primal objective. You are the ultimate resting place of

all this universe. You are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest. You are the
maintainer of the eternal religion, the Personality of Godhead. This is my
opinion.

TEXT  19

ANaaidMaDYaaNTaMaNaNTavqYaR‚

 MaNaNTabahu& XaiXaSaUYaRNae}aMa( )

PaXYaaiMa Tva& dqáhuTaaXav£&-

 SvTaeJaSaa ivìiMad& TaPaNTaMa( )) 19 ))

anädi-madhyäntam ananta-véryam
ananta-bähuà çaçi-sürya-netram
paçyämi tväà dépta-hutäça-vaktraà
sva-tejasä viçvam idaà tapantam

SYNONYMS

anädi—without beginning; madhya—middle; antam—or end;
ananta—unlimited; véryam—glories; ananta—unlimited; bähum—arms;
çaçi—the moon; sürya—and sun; netram—eyes; paçyämi—I see; tväm—You;
dépta—blazing; hutäça-vaktram—fire coming out of Your mouth;
sva-tejasä—by Your radiance; viçvam—universe; idam—this;
tapantam—heating.

TRANSLATION

You are without origin, middle or end. Your glory is unlimited. You have
numberless arms, and the sun and moon are Your eyes. I see You with blazing
fire coming forth from Your mouth, burning this entire universe by Your own
radiance.

PURPORT

There  is  no  limit  to  the  extent  of  the  six  opulences  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Here and in many other places there is repetition, but
according to the scriptures, repetition of the glories of Kåñëa is not a literary

weakness.  It  is  said  that  at  a  time  of  bewilderment  or  wonder  or  of  great
ecstasy, statements are repeated over and over. That is not a flaw.

TEXT  20

ÛavaPa*iQaVYaaeirdMaNTar& ih

 VYaaá& TvYaEke-Na idXaê SavaR" )

d*îad(>auTa& æPaMauGa]& Taved&

 l/aek-}aYa& Pa[VYaiQaTa& MahaTMaNa( )) 20 ))

dyäv ä-påthivyor idam antaraà hi
vyäptaà tvayaikena diçaç ca sarväù
dåñövädbhutaà rüpam ugraà tavedaà
loka-trayaà pravyathitaà mahätman

SYNONYMS

dyau—from outer space; ä-påthivyoù—to the earth; idam—this;
antaram—between; hi—certainly; vyäptam—pervaded; tvayä—by You;
ekena—alone; diçaù—directions; ca—and; sarväù—all; dåñövä—by seeing;
adbhutam—wonderful; rüpam—form; ugram—terrible; tava—Your;
idam—this; loka—the planetary systems; trayam—three;
pravyathitam—perturbed; mahä-ätman—O great one.

TRANSLATION

Although You are one, You spread throughout the sky and the planets and
all space between. O great one, seeing this wondrous and terrible form, all the
planetary systems are perturbed.

PURPORT

Dyäv ä-påthivyoù (“the space between heaven and earth”) and loka-trayam
(“the three worlds”) are significant words in this verse because it appears that

not  only  did  Arjuna  see  this  universal  form  of  the  Lord,  but  others  in  other
planetary systems saw it also. Arjuna’s seeing of the universal form was not a
dream. All whom the Lord endowed with divine vision saw that universal form
on the battlefield.

TEXT  21

AMaq ih Tva& SaurSaºa ivXaiNTa

 ke-icÙqTaa" Pa[aÅl/Yaae Ga*<aiNTa )

SvSTaqTYau¤-a MahizRiSaÖSaºa"

 STauviNTa Tva& STauiTai>a" PauZk-l/ai>a" )) 21 ))

amé hi tväà sura-saìghä viçanti
kecid bhétäù präïjalayo gåëanti
svastéty uktvä maharñi-siddha-saìghäù
stuvanti tväà stutibhiù puñkaläbhiù

SYNONYMS

amé—all those; hi—certainly; tväm—You; sura-saìghäù—groups of demigods;
viçanti—are entering; kecit—some of them; bhétäù—out of fear;
präïjalayaù—with folded hands; gåëanti—are offering prayers; svasti—all
peace; iti—thus; uktvä—speaking; mahä-åñi—great sages;
siddha-saìghäù—perfect beings; stuvanti—are singing hymns; tväm—unto
You; stutibhiù—with prayers; puñkaläbhiù—Vedic hymns.

TRANSLATION

All the hosts of demigods are surrendering before You and entering into
You. Some of them, very much afraid, are offering prayers with folded hands.
Hosts of great sages and perfected beings, crying “All peace!” are praying to
You by singing the Vedic hymns.

PURPORT

The demigods in all the planetary systems feared the terrific manifestation

of the universal form and its glaring effulgence and so prayed for protection.

TEXT  22

åd]aidTYaa vSavae Yae c SaaDYaa

 ivìe_iìNaaE MaåTaêaeZMaPaaê )

GaNDavRYa+aaSauriSaÖSaºa

 vq+aNTae Tva& iviSMaTaaêEv SaveR )) 22 ))

rudrädityä vasavo ye ca sädhyä
viçve ’çvinau marutaç coñmapäç ca
gandharva-yakñäsura-siddha-saìghä
vékñante tväà vismitäç caiva sarve

SYNONYMS

rudra—manifestations of Lord Çiva; ädityäù—the Ädityas; vasavaù—the
Vasus; ye—all those; ca—and; sädhyäù—the Sädhyas; viçve—the Viçvedevas;
açvinau—the Açviné-kumäras; marutaù—the Maruts; ca—and; uñma-päù—the
forefathers; ca—and; gandharva—of the Gandharvas; yakña—the Yakñas;
asura—the demons; siddha—and the perfected demigods; saìghäù—the
assemblies; vékñante—are beholding; tväm—You; vismitäù—in wonder;
ca—also; eva—certainly; sarve—all.

TRANSLATION

All the various manifestations of Lord Çiva, the Ädityas, the Vasus, the

Sädhyas, the Viçvedevas, the two Açvés, the Maruts, the forefathers, the
Gandharvas, the Yakñas, the Asuras and the perfected demigods are beholding
You in wonder.

TEXT

 23

æPa& Mahtae bhuv£-Nae}a&

 Mahabahae bhubahUåPaadMa( )

bhUdr& bhud&í\ak-ral&/

 d*îa l/aek-a" Pa[VYaiQaTaaSTaQaahMa( )) 23 ))

rüpaà mahat te bahu-vaktra-netraà
mahä-bäho bahu-bähüru-pädam
bahüdaraà bahu-daàñörä-karälaà
dåñövä lokäù pravyathitäs tathäham

SYNONYMS

rüpam—the form; mahat—very great; te—of You; bahu—many; vaktra—faces;
netram—and eyes; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one; bahu—many;
bähu—arms; üru—thighs; pädam—and legs; bahu-udaram—many bellies;
bahu-daàñörä—many teeth; karälam—horrible; dåñövä—seeing; lokäù—all the
planets; pravyathitäù—perturbed; tathä—similarly; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed at
seeing Your great form, with its many faces, eyes, arms, thighs, legs, and bellies
and Your many terrible teeth; and as they are disturbed, so am I.

TEXT  24

Na>a"SPa*Xa& dqáMaNaek-v<a|

 VYaataaNaNa& dqáivXaal/Nae}aMa( )

d*îa ih Tva& Pa[VYaiQaTaaNTaraTMaa

 Da*iTa& Na ivNdaiMa XaMa& c ivZ<aae )) 24 ))

nabhaù-spåçaà déptam aneka-varëaà
vyättänanaà dépta-viçäla-netram
dåñövä hi tväà pravyathitäntar-ätmä
dhåtià na vindämi çamaà ca viñëo

SYNONYMS

nabhaù-spåçam—touching the sky; déptam—glowing; aneka—many;
varëam—colors; vyätta—open; änanam—mouths; dépta—glowing;
viçäla—very great; netram—eyes; dåñövä—seeing; hi—certainly; tväm—You;
pravyathita—perturbed; antaù—within; ätmä—soul; dhåtim—steadiness;
na—not; vindämi—I have; çamam—mental tranquillity; ca—also; viñëo—O
Lord Viñëu.

TRANSLATION

O all-pervading Viñëu, seeing You with Your many radiant colors touching

the sky, Your gaping mouths, and Your great glowing eyes, my mind is
perturbed by fear. I can no longer maintain my steadiness or equilibrium of
mind.

TEXT  25

d&í\ak-ral/aiNa c Tae Mau%aiNa

 d*îEv k-al/aNal/Saià>aaiNa )

idXaae Na JaaNae Na l/>ae c XaMaR

 Pa[Saqd deveXa JaGaiàvaSa )) 25 ))

daàñörä-karäläni ca te mukhäni
dåñövaiva kälänala-sannibhäni
diço na jäne na labhe ca çarma

praséda deveça jagan-niväsa

SYNONYMS

daàñörä—teeth; karäläni—terrible; ca—also; te—Your; mukhäni—faces;
dåñövä—seeing; eva—thus; käla-anala—the fire of death; sannibhäni—as if;
diçaù—the directions; na—not; jäne—I know; na—not; labhe—I obtain;
ca—and; çarma—grace; praséda—be pleased; deva-éça—O Lord of all lords;
jagat-niväsa—O refuge of the worlds.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I cannot
keep my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces and awful teeth. In all
directions I am bewildered.

TEXTS  26–27

AMaq c Tva& Da*Taraí\SYa Pau}aa" SaveR SahEvaviNaPaal/SaºE" )

>aqZMaae d]ae<a" SaUTaPau}aSTaQaaSaaE SahaSMadqYaEriPa YaaeDaMau:YaE" )) 26 ))

v£-ai<a Tae TvrMaa<aa ivXaiNTa d&í\ak-ral/aiNa >aYaaNak-aiNa )

ke-iciÜl/Gana dXaNaaNTarezu SaNd*XYaNTae cUi<aRTaEåtaMaa®E" )) 27 ))

amé ca tväà dhåtaräñörasya puträù
sarve sahaivävani-päla-saìghaiù
bhéñmo droëaù süta-putras tathäsau
sahäsmadéyair api yodha-mukhyaiù

vakträëi te tvaramäëä viçanti
daàñörä-karäläni bhayänakäni
kecid vilagnä daçanäntareñu
sandåçyante cürëitair uttamäìgaiù

SYNONYMS

amé—these; ca—also; tväm—You; dhåtaräñörasya—of Dhåtaräñöra;
puträù—the sons; sarve—all; saha—with; eva—indeed; avani-päla—of warrior
kings; saìghaiù—the groups; bhéñmaù—Bhéñmadeva; droëaù—Droëäcärya;
süta-putraù—Karëa; tathä—also; asau—that; saha—with; asmadéyaiù—our;
api—also; yodha-mukhyaiù—chiefs among the warriors; vakträëi—mouths;
te—Your; tvaramäëäù—rushing; viçanti—are entering; daàñörä—teeth;
karäläni—terrible; bhayänakäni—very fearful; kecit—some of them;
vilagnäù—becoming attached; daçana-antareñu—between the teeth;
sandåçyante—are seen; cürëitaiù—with smashed; uttama-aìgaiù—heads.

TRANSLATION

All the sons of Dhåtaräñöra, along with their allied kings, and Bhéñma,
Droëa, Karëa—and our chief soldiers also—are rushing into Your fearful
mouths. And some I see trapped with heads smashed between Your teeth.

PURPORT

In a previous verse the Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would be
very  interested  in  seeing.  Now  Arjuna  sees  that  the  leaders  of  the  opposite
party (Bhéñma, Droëa, Karëa and all the sons of Dhåtaräñöra) and their soldiers
and Arjuna’s own soldiers are all being annihilated. This is an indication that
after the death of nearly all the persons assembled at Kurukñetra, Arjuna will
emerge victorious. It is also mentioned here that Bhéñma, who is supposed to be
unconquerable,  will  also  be  smashed.  So  also  Karëa.  Not  only  will  the  great
warriors  of  the  other  party  like  Bhéñma  be  smashed,  but  some  of  the  great
warriors of Arjuna’s side also.

TEXT  28

YaQaa NadqNaa& bhvae_MbuveGaa" SaMaud]Maevai>aMau%a d]viNTa )

TaQaa TavaMaq Narl/aek-vqra ivXaiNTa v£-a<Yai>aivJvl/iNTa )) 28 ))

yathä nadénäà bahavo ’mbu-vegäù
samudram eväbhimukhä dravanti
tathä tavämé nara-loka-vérä
viçanti vakträëy abhivijvalanti

SYNONYMS

yathä—as; nadénäm—of the rivers; bahavaù—the many; ambu-vegäù—waves
of the waters; samudram—the ocean; eva—certainly; abhimukhäù—towards;
dravanti—glide; tathä—similarly; tava—Your; amé—all these;
nara-loka-véräù—kings of human society; viçanti—are entering; vakträëi—the
mouths; abhivijvalanti—and are blazing.

TRANSLATION

As the many waves of the rivers flow into the ocean, so do all these great

warriors enter blazing into Your mouths.

TEXT  29

YaQaa Pa[dqá& Jvl/Na& PaTa®a ivXaiNTa NaaXaaYa SaMa*ÖveGaa" )

TaQaEv NaaXaaYa ivXaiNTa l/aek-a‚ STavaiPa v£-ai<a SaMa*ÖveGaa" )) 29 ))

yathä pradéptaà jvalanaà pataìgä
viçanti näçäya samåddha-vegäù
tathaiva näçäya viçanti lokäs
taväpi vakträëi samåddha-vegäù

SYNONYMS

yathä—as; pradéptam—blazing; jvalanam—a fire; pataìgäù—moths;
viçanti—enter; näçäya—for destruction; samåddha—with full; vegäù—speed;

tathä eva—similarly; näçäya—for destruction; viçanti—are entering;
lokäù—all people; tava—Your; api—also; vakträëi—mouths;
samåddha-vegäù—with full speed.

TRANSLATION

I see all people rushing full speed into Your mouths, as moths dash to

destruction in a blazing fire.

TEXT  30

le/il/ùSae Ga]SaMaaNa" SaMaNTaa‚ çaek-aNSaMaGa]aNvdNaEJvRl/iÙ" )

TaeJaaei>araPaUYaR JaGaTSaMaGa]& >aaSaSTavaeGa]a" Pa[TaPaiNTa ivZ<aae )) 30 ))

lelihyase grasamänaù samantäl
lokän samagrän vadanair jvaladbhiù
tejobhir äpürya jagat samagraà
bhäsas tavogräù pratapanti viñëo

SYNONYMS

lelihyase—You are licking; grasamänaù—devouring; samantät—from all
directions; lokän—people; samagrän—all; vadanaiù—by the mouths;
jvaladbhiù—blazing; tejobhiù—by effulgence; äpürya—covering; jagat—the
universe; samagram—all; bhäsaù—rays; tava—Your; ugräù—terrible;
pratapanti—are scorching; viñëo—O all-pervading Lord.

TRANSLATION

O Viñëu, I see You devouring all people from all sides with Your flaming
mouths. Covering all the universe with Your effulgence, You are manifest with
terrible, scorching rays.

TEXT  31

Aa:Yaaih Mae k-ae >avaNauGa]æPaae NaMaae_STau Tae devvr Pa[Saqd )

ivjaTauiMaC^aiMa >avNTaMaaÛ& Na ih Pa[JaaNaaiMa Tav Pa[v*itaMa( )) 31 ))

äkhyähi me ko bhavän ugra-rüpo
namo ’stu te deva-vara praséda
vijïätum icchämi bhavantam ädyaà
na hi prajänämi tava pravåttim

SYNONYMS

äkhyähi—please explain; me—unto me; kaù—who; bhavän—You;
ugra-rüpaù—fierce form; namaù astu—obeisances; te—unto You;
deva-vara—O great one amongst the demigods; praséda—be gracious;
vijïätum—to know; icchämi—I wish; bhavantam—You; ädyam—the original;
na—not; hi—certainly; prajänämi—do I know; tava—Your;
pravåttim—mission.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer my
obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. You are the primal Lord. I want
to know about You, for I do not know what Your mission is.

TEXT  32

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

k-al/ae_iSMa l/aek-+aYak*-TPa[v*Öae l/aek-aNSaMaahTauRiMah Pa[v*ta" )

‰Tae_iPa Tva& Na >aivZYaiNTa SaveR Yae_viSQaTaa" Pa[TYaNaqke-zu YaaeDaa" )) 32 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
kälo ’smi loka-kñaya-kåt pravåddho
lokän samähartum iha pravåttaù
åte ’pi tväà na bhaviñyanti sarve

ye ’vasthitäù pratyanékeñu yodhäù

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; kälaù—time; asmi—I
am; loka—of the worlds; kñaya-kåt—the destroyer; pravåddhaù—great;
lokän—all people; samähartum—in destroying; iha—in this world;
pravåttaù—engaged; åte—without, except for; api—even; tväm—you;
na—never; bhaviñyanti—will be; sarve—all; ye—who; avasthitäù—situated;
prati-anékeñu—on the opposite sides; yodhäù—the soldiers.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Time I am, the great destroyer of

the worlds, and I have come here to destroy all people. With the exception of
you [the Päëòavas], all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.

PURPORT

Although  Arjuna  knew  that  Kåñëa  was  his  friend  and  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  he  was  puzzled  by  the  various  forms  exhibited  by
Kåñëa. Therefore he asked further about the actual mission of this devastating
force. It is written in the Vedas that the Supreme Truth destroys everything,
even the brähmaëas. As stated in the Kaöha Upaniñad (1.2.25),

yasya brahma ca kñatraà ca
ubhe bhavata odanaù
måtyur yasyopasecanaà
ka itthä veda yatra saù

Eventually all the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and everyone else are devoured like
a  meal  by  the  Supreme.  This  form  of  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  all-devouring
giant,  and  here  Kåñëa  presents  Himself  in  that  form  of  all-devouring  time.
Except for a few Päëòavas, everyone who was present on that battlefield would
be devoured by Him. Arjuna was not in favor of the fight, and he thought it
was better not to fight; then there would be no frustration. In reply, the Lord is

saying that even if he did not fight, every one of them would be destroyed, for
that was His plan. If Arjuna stopped fighting, they would die in another way.
Death could not be checked, even if he did not fight. In fact, they were already
dead. Time is destruction, and all manifestations are to be vanquished by the
desire of the Supreme Lord. That is the law of nature.

TEXT  33

TaSMaatvMauitaï YaXaae l/>aSv iJaTva Xa}aUN>au&+v raJYa& SaMa*ÖMa( )

MaYaEvETae iNahTaa" PaUvRMaev iNaiMataMaa}a& >av SaVYaSaaicNa( )) 33 ))

tasmät tvam uttiñöha yaço labhasva
jitvä çatrün bhuìkñva räjyaà samåddham
mayaivaite nihatäù pürvam eva
nimitta-mätraà bhava savya-säcin

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; tvam—you; uttiñöha—get up; yaçaù—fame; labhasva—gain;
jitvä—conquering; çatrün—enemies; bhuìkñva—enjoy; räjyam—kingdom;
samåddham—flourishing; mayä—by Me; eva—certainly; ete—all these;
nihatäù—killed; pürvam eva—by previous arrangement; nimitta-mätram—just
the cause; bhava—become; savya-säcin—O Savyasäcé.

TRANSLATION

Therefore get up. Prepare to fight and win glory. Conquer your enemies and
enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by My arrangement,
and you, O Savyasäcé, can be but an instrument in the fight.

PURPORT

Savya-säcin  refers  to  one  who  can  shoot  arrows  very  expertly  in  the  field;
thus Arjuna is addressed as an expert warrior capable of delivering arrows to

kill  his  enemies.  “Just  become  an  instrument”:  nimitta-mätram.  This  word  is
also very significant. The whole world is moving according to the plan of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Foolish persons who do not have sufficient
knowledge think that nature is moving without a plan and all manifestations
are but accidental formations. There are many so-called scientists who suggest
that  perhaps  it  was  like  this,  or  maybe  like  that,  but  there  is  no  question  of
“perhaps”  and  “maybe.”  There  is  a  specific  plan  being  carried  out  in  this
material  world.  What  is  this  plan?  This  cosmic  manifestation  is  a  chance  for
the  conditioned  souls  to  go  back  to  Godhead,  back  to  home.  As  long  as  they
have the domineering mentality which makes them try to lord it over material
nature, they are conditioned. But anyone who can understand the plan of the
Supreme  Lord  and  cultivate  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  most  intelligent.  The
creation  and  destruction  of  the  cosmic  manifestation  are  under  the  superior
guidance  of  God.  Thus  the  Battle  of  Kurukñetra  was  fought  according  to  the
plan of God. Arjuna was refusing to fight, but he was told that he should fight
in accordance with the desire of the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy.
If  one  is  in  full  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  his  life  is  devoted  to  the  Lord’s
transcendental service, he is perfect.

TEXT  34

d]ae<a& c >aqZMa& c JaYad]Qa& c k-<a| TaQaaNYaaNaiPa YaaeDavqraNa( )

MaYaa hTaa&STv& Jaih MaaVYaiQaïa YauDYaSv JaeTaaiSa r<ae SaPaÒaNa( )) 34 ))

droëaà ca bhéñmaà ca jayadrathaà ca
karëaà tathänyän api yodha-vérän
mayä hatäàs tvaà jahi mä vyathiñöhä
yudhyasva jetäsi raëe sapatnän

SYNONYMS

droëam ca—also Droëa; bhéñmam ca—also Bhéñma; jayadratham ca—also
Jayadratha; karëam—Karëa; tathä—also; anyän—others; api—certainly;

yodha-vérän—great warriors; mayä—by Me; hatän—already killed; tvam—you;
jahi—destroy; mä—do not; vyathiñöhäù—be disturbed; yudhyasva—just fight;
jetä asi—you will conquer; raëe—in the fight; sapatnän—enemies.

TRANSLATION

Droëa, Bhéñma, Jayadratha, Karëa and the other great warriors have already

been destroyed by Me. Therefore, kill them and do not be disturbed. Simply
fight, and you will vanquish your enemies in battle.

PURPORT

Every  plan  is  made  by  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  but  He  is  so
kind  and  merciful  to  His  devotees  that  He  wants  to  give  the  credit  to  His
devotees who carry out His plan according to His desire. Life should therefore
move in such a way that everyone acts in Kåñëa consciousness and understands
the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the medium of a spiritual master.
The  plans  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  are  understood  by  His
mercy,  and  the  plans  of  the  devotees  are  as  good  as  His  plans.  One  should
follow such plans and be victorious in the struggle for existence.

TEXT  35

SaÅYa ovac )

WTaC^]uuTva vcNa& ke-XavSYa k*-TaaÅil/veRPaMaaNa" ik-rqTaq )

NaMaSk*-Tva >aUYa Wvah k*-Z<a& SaGaÓd& >aqTa>aqTa" Pa[<aMYa )) 35 ))

saïjaya uväca
etac chrutvä vacanaà keçavasya
kåtäïjalir vepamänaù kirété
namaskåtvä bhüya eväha kåñëaà
sa-gadgadaà bhéta-bhétaù praëamya

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; etat—thus; çrutvä—hearing; vacanam—the
speech; keçavasya—of Kåñëa; kåta-aïjaliù—with folded hands;
vepamänaù—trembling; kirété—Arjuna; namaskåtvä—offering obeisances;
bhüyaù—again; eva—also; äha—said; kåñëam—unto Kåñëa;
sa-gadgadam—with a faltering voice; bhéta-bhétaù—fearful;
praëamya—offering obeisances.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said to Dhåtaräñöra: O King, after hearing these words from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the trembling Arjuna offered obeisances with
folded hands again and again. He fearfully spoke to Lord Kåñëa in a faltering
voice, as follows.

PURPORT

As  we  have  already  explained,  because  of  the  situation  created  by  the
universal  form  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Arjuna  became
bewildered in wonder; thus he began to offer his respectful obeisances to Kåñëa
again and again, and with faltering voice he began to pray, not as a friend, but
as a devotee in wonder.

TEXT  36

AJauRNa ovac )

SQaaNae ôzqke-Xa Tav Pa[k-ITYaaR JaGaTPa[ôZYaTYaNaurJYaTae c )

r+aa&iSa >aqTaaiNa idXaae d]viNTa SaveR NaMaSYaiNTa c iSaÖSaºa" )) 36 ))

arjuna uväca
sthäne håñékeça tava prakértyä
jagat prahåñyaty anurajyate ca

rakñäàsi bhétäni diço dravanti
sarve namasyanti ca siddha-saìghäù

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; sthäne—rightly; håñéka-éça—O master of all
senses; tava—Your; prakértyä—by the glories; jagat—the entire world;
prahåñyati—is rejoicing; anurajyate—is becoming attached; ca—and;
rakñäàsi—the demons; bhétäni—out of fear; diçaù—in all directions;
dravanti—are fleeing; sarve—all; namasyanti—are offering respects; ca—also;
siddha-saìghäù—the perfect human beings.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O master of the senses, the world becomes joyful upon hearing

Your name, and thus everyone becomes attached to You. Although the
perfected beings offer You their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and
they flee here and there. All this is rightly done.

PURPORT

Arjuna,  after  hearing  from  Kåñëa  about  the  outcome  of  the  Battle  of
Kurukñetra,  became  enlightened,  and  as  a  great  devotee  and  friend  of  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  he  said  that  everything  done  by  Kåñëa  is
quite  fit.  Arjuna  confirmed  that  Kåñëa  is  the  maintainer  and  the  object  of
worship for the devotees and the destroyer of the undesirables. His actions are
equally  good  for  all.  Arjuna  understood  herein  that  when  the  Battle  of
Kurukñetra  was  being  concluded,  in  outer  space  there  were  present  many
demigods, siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets, and they were
observing  the  fight  because  Kåñëa  was  present  there.  When  Arjuna  saw  the
universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, but others, who
were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord was praised. Out
of  their  natural  fear  of  the  devastating  form  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  they  fled.  Kåñëa’s  treatment  of  the  devotees  and  the  atheists  is

praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devotee glorifies the Lord because he knows
that whatever He does is good for all.

TEXT  37

k-SMaaÀ Tae Na NaMaerNMahaTMaNa( GarqYaSae b]ø<aae_PYaaidk-}aeR )

ANaNTa deveXa JaGaiàvaSa TvMa+ar& SadSataTPar& YaTa( )) 37 ))

kasmäc ca te na nameran mahätman
garéyase brahmaëo ’py ädi-kartre
ananta deveça jagan-niväsa
tvam akñaraà sad-asat tat paraà yat

SYNONYMS

kasmät—why; ca—also; te—unto You; na—not; nameran—they should offer
proper obeisances; mahä-ätman—O great one; garéyase—who are better;
brahmaëaù—than Brahmä; api—although; ädi-kartre—to the supreme creator;
ananta—O unlimited; deva-éça—O God of the gods; jagat-niväsa—O refuge of
the universe; tvam—You are; akñaram—imperishable; sat-asat—to cause and
effect; tat param—transcendental; yat—because.

TRANSLATION

O great one, greater even than Brahmä, You are the original creator. Why

then should they not offer their respectful obeisances unto You? O limitless
one, God of gods, refuge of the universe! You are the invincible source, the
cause of all causes, transcendental to this material manifestation.

PURPORT

By  this  offering  of  obeisances,  Arjuna  indicates  that  Kåñëa  is  worshipable
by  everyone.  He  is  all-pervading,  and  He  is  the  Soul  of  every  soul.  Arjuna  is
addressing Kåñëa as mahätmä, which means that He is most magnanimous and

unlimited. Ananta indicates that there is nothing which is not covered by the
influence  and  energy  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  and  deveça  means  that  He  is  the
controller of all demigods and is above them all. He is the shelter of the whole
universe.  Arjuna  also  thought  that  it  was  fitting  that  all  the  perfect  living
entities  and  powerful  demigods  offer  their  respectful  obeisances  unto  Him,
because no one is greater than Him. Arjuna especially mentions that Kåñëa is
greater than Brahmä because Brahmä is created by Him. Brahmä is born out of
the lotus stem grown from the navel abdomen of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who
is Kåñëa’s plenary expansion; therefore Brahmä and Lord Çiva, who is born of
Brahmä,  and  all  other  demigods  must  offer  their  respectful  obeisances.  It  is
stated  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  that  the  Lord  is  respected  by  Lord  Çiva  and
Brahmä  and  similar  other  demigods.  The  word  akñaram  is  very  significant
because  this  material  creation  is  subject  to  destruction  but  the  Lord  is  above
this material creation. He is the cause of all causes, and being so, He is superior
to all the conditioned souls within this material nature as well as the material
cosmic manifestation itself. He is therefore the all-great Supreme.

TEXT  38

TvMaaiddev" Pauåz" Paura<a‚ STvMaSYa ivìSYa Par& iNaDaaNaMa( )

vetaaiSa veÛ& c Par& c DaaMa TvYaa TaTa& ivìMaNaNTaæPa )) 38 ))

tvam ädi-devaù puruñaù puräëas
tvam asya viçvasya paraà nidhänam
vettäsi vedyaà ca paraà ca dhäma
tvayä tataà viçvam ananta-rüpa

SYNONYMS

tvam—You; ädi-devaù—the original Supreme God; puruñaù—personality;
puräëaù—old; tvam—You; asya—of this; viçvasya—universe;
param—transcendental; nidhänam—refuge; vettä—the knower; asi—You are;
vedyam—the knowable; ca—and; param—transcendental; ca—and;

dhäma—refuge; tvayä—by You; tatam—pervaded; viçvam—the universe;
ananta-rüpa—O unlimited form.

TRANSLATION

You are the original Personality of Godhead, the oldest, the ultimate

sanctuary of this manifested cosmic world. You are the knower of everything,
and You are all that is knowable. You are the supreme refuge, above the
material modes. O limitless form! This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded
by You!

PURPORT

Everything is resting on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore He
is  the  ultimate  rest.  Nidhänam  means  that  everything,  even  the  Brahman
effulgence,  rests  on  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa.  He  is  the
knower  of  everything  that  is  happening  in  this  world,  and  if  knowledge  has
any  end,  He  is  the  end  of  all  knowledge;  therefore  He  is  the  known  and  the
knowable. He is the object of knowledge because He is all-pervading. Because
He is the cause in the spiritual world, He is transcendental. He is also the chief
personality in the transcendental world.

TEXT  39

vaYauYaRMaae_iGanvRå<a" XaXaaª" Pa[JaaPaiTaSTv& Pa[iPaTaaMahê )

NaMaae NaMaSTae_STau Sahók*-Tv" PauNaê >aUYaae_iPa NaMaae NaMaSTae )) 39 ))

väyur yamo ’gnir varuëaù çaçäìkaù
prajäpatis tvaà prapitämahaç ca
namo namas te ’stu sahasra-kåtvaù
punaç ca bhüyo ’pi namo namas te

SYNONYMS

väyuù—air; yamaù—the controller; agniù—fire; varuëaù—water;
çaça-aìkaù—the moon; prajäpatiù—Brahmä; tvam—You; prapitämahaù—the
great-grandfather; ca—also; namaù—my respects; namaù—again my respects;
te—unto You; astu—let there be; sahasra-kåtvaù—a thousand times; punaù
ca—and again; bhüyaù—again; api—also; namaù—offering my respects;
namaù te—offering my respects unto You.

TRANSLATION

You are air, and You are the supreme controller! You are fire, You are
water, and You are the moon! You are Brahmä, the first living creature, and
You are the great-grandfather. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto
You a thousand times, and again and yet again!

PURPORT

The  Lord  is  addressed  here  as  air  because  the  air  is  the  most  important
representation  of  all  the  demigods,  being  all-pervasive.  Arjuna  also  addresses
Kåñëa  as  the  great-grandfather  because  He  is  the  father  of  Brahmä,  the  first
living creature in the universe.

TEXT  40

NaMa" PaurSTaadQa Pa*ïTaSTae NaMaae_STau Tae SavRTa Wv SavR )

ANaNTavqYaaRiMaTaiv§-MaSTv& Sav| SaMaaPanaeiz TaTaae_iSa SavR" )) 40 ))

namaù purastäd atha påñöhatas te
namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva
ananta-véryämita-vikramas tvaà
sarvaà samäpnoñi tato ’si sarvaù

SYNONYMS

namaù—offering obeisances; purastät—from the front; atha—also;

påñöhataù—from behind; te—unto You; namaù astu—I offer my respects;
te—unto You; sarvataù—from all sides; eva—indeed; sarva—because You are
everything; ananta-vérya—unlimited potency; amita-vikramaù—and unlimited
force; tvam—You; sarvam—everything; samäpnoñi—You cover;
tataù—therefore; asi—You are; sarvaù—everything.

TRANSLATION

Obeisances to You from the front, from behind and from all sides! O

unbounded power, You are the master of limitless might! You are all-pervading,
and thus You are everything!

PURPORT

Out  of  loving  ecstasy  for  Kåñëa,  his  friend,  Arjuna  is  offering  his  respects
from  all  sides.  He  is  accepting  that  He  is  the  master  of  all  potencies  and  all
prowess and far superior to all the great warriors assembled on the battlefield.
It is said in the Viñëu Puräëa (1.9.69):

yo ’yaà tavägato deva
samépaà devatä-gaëaù
sa tvam eva jagat-srañöä
yataù sarva-gato bhavän

“Whoever  comes  before  You,  be  he  a  demigod,  is  created  by  You,  O

Supreme Personality of Godhead.”

TEXTS  41–42

Sa%eiTa MaTva Pa[Sa>a& Yadu¢&- he k*-Z<a he Yaadv he Sa%eiTa )

AJaaNaTaa MaihMaaNa& Taved& MaYaa Pa[MaadaTPa[<aYaeNa vaiPa )) 41 ))

YaÀavhaSaaQaRMaSaTk*-Taae_iSa ivharXaYYaaSaNa>aaeJaNaezu )

Wk-ae_QavaPYaCYauTa TaTSaMa+a& TaT+aaMaYae TvaMahMaPa[MaeYaMa( )) 42 ))

sakheti matvä prasabhaà yad uktaà
he kåñëa he yädava he sakheti
ajänatä mahimänaà tavedaà
mayä pramädät praëayena väpi

yac cävahäsärtham asat-kåto ’si
vihära-çayyäsana-bhojaneñu
eko ’tha väpy acyuta tat-samakñaà
tat kñämaye tväm aham aprameyam

SYNONYMS

sakhä—friend; iti—thus; matvä—thinking; prasabham—presumptuously;
yat—whatever; uktam—said; he kåñëa—O Kåñëa; he yädava—O Yädava; he
sakhe—O my dear friend; iti—thus; ajänatä—without knowing;
mahimänam—glories; tava—Your; idam—this; mayä—by me; pramädät—out
of foolishness; praëayena—out of love; vä api—either; yat—whatever;
ca—also; avahäsa-artham—for joking; asat-kåtaù—dishonored; asi—You have
been; vihära—in relaxation; çayyä—in lying down; äsana—in sitting;
bhojaneñu—or while eating together; ekaù—alone; atha vä—or; api—also;
acyuta—O infallible one; tat-samakñam—among companions; tat—all those;
kñämaye—ask forgiveness; tväm—from You; aham—I;
aprameyam—immeasurable.

TRANSLATION

Thinking of You as my friend, I have rashly addressed You “O Kåñëa,” “O
Yädava,” “O my friend,” not knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I
may have done in madness or in love. I have dishonored You many times,
jesting as we relaxed, lay on the same bed, or sat or ate together, sometimes
alone and sometimes in front of many friends. O infallible one, please excuse me
for all those offenses.

PURPORT

Although Kåñëa is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form, Arjuna
remembers his friendly relationship with Kåñëa and is therefore asking pardon
and requesting Kåñëa to excuse him for the many informal gestures which arise
out  of  friendship.  He  is  admitting  that  formerly  he  did  not  know  that  Kåñëa
could  assume  such  a  universal  form,  although  Kåñëa  explained  it  as  his
intimate  friend.  Arjuna  did  not  know  how  many  times  he  may  have
dishonored Kåñëa by addressing Him “O my friend,” “O Kåñëa,” “O Yädava,”
etc.,  without  acknowledging  His  opulence.  But  Kåñëa  is  so  kind  and  merciful
that in spite of such opulence He played with Arjuna as a friend. Such is the
transcendental  loving  reciprocation  between  the  devotee  and  the  Lord.  The
relationship  between  the  living  entity  and  Kåñëa  is  fixed  eternally;  it  cannot
be forgotten, as we can see from the behavior of Arjuna. Although Arjuna has
seen  the  opulence  in  the  universal  form,  he  cannot  forget  his  friendly
relationship with Kåñëa.

TEXT  43

iPaTaaiSa l/aek-SYa cracrSYa TvMaSYa PaUJYaê GauåGaRrqYaaNa( )

Na TvTSaMaae_STYa>YaiDak-" ku-Taae_NYaae l/aek-}aYae_PYaPa[iTaMaPa[>aav )) 43 ))

pitäsi lokasya caräcarasya
tvam asya püjyaç ca gurur garéyän
na tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikaù kuto ’nyo
loka-traye ’py apratima-prabhäva

SYNONYMS

pitä—the father; asi—You are; lokasya—of all the world; cara—moving;
acarasya—and nonmoving; tvam—You are; asya—of this;
püjyaù—worshipable; ca—also; guruù—master; garéyän—glorious; na—never;
tvat-samaù—equal to You; asti—there is; abhyadhikaù—greater; kutaù—how is

it possible; anyaù—other; loka-traye—in the three planetary systems;
api—also; apratima-prabhäva—O immeasurable power.

TRANSLATION

You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, of the moving and
the nonmoving. You are its worshipable chief, the supreme spiritual master. No
one is equal to You, nor can anyone be one with You. How then could there be
anyone greater than You within the three worlds, O Lord of immeasurable
power?

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  is  worshipable  as  a  father  is
worshipable for his son. He is the spiritual master because He originally gave
the  Vedic  instructions  to  Brahmä  and  presently  He  is  also  instructing
Bhagavad-gétä to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and any
bona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendant in the
line  of  disciplic  succession  stemming  from  Kåñëa.  Without  being  a
representative  of  Kåñëa,  one  cannot  become  a  teacher  or  spiritual  master  of
transcendental subject matter.

The  Lord  is  being  paid  obeisances  in  all  respects.  He  is  of  immeasurable
greatness.  No  one  can  be  greater  than  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,
Kåñëa,  because  no  one  is  equal  to  or  higher  than  Kåñëa  within  any
manifestation, spiritual or material. Everyone is below Him. No one can excel
Him. This is stated in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (6.8):

na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate
na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate

The Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, has senses and a body like the ordinary man, but
for  Him  there  is  no  difference  between  His  senses,  His  body,  His  mind  and
Himself.  Foolish  persons  who  do  not  perfectly  know  Him  say  that  Kåñëa  is
different  from  His  soul,  mind,  heart  and  everything  else.  Kåñëa  is  absolute;
therefore  His  activities  and  potencies  are  supreme.  It  is  also  stated  that

although  He  does  not  have  senses  like  ours,  He  can  perform  all  sensory
activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect nor limited. No one can
be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him, and everyone is lower than
Him.

The  knowledge,  strength  and  activities  of  the  Supreme  Personality  are  all

transcendental. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):

janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so ’rjuna

Whoever  knows  Kåñëa’s  transcendental  body,  activities  and  perfection,
after  quitting  his  body,  returns  to  Him  and  doesn’t  come  back  again  to  this
miserable  world.  Therefore  one  should  know  that  Kåñëa’s  activities  are
different from others. The best policy is to follow the principles of Kåñëa; that
will  make  one  perfect.  It  is  also  stated  that  there  is  no  one  who  is  master  of
Kåñëa; everyone is His servant. The Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 5.142) confirms,
ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya: only Kåñëa is God, and everyone else is His
servant. Everyone is complying with His order. There is no one who can deny
His  order.  Everyone  is  acting  according  to  His  direction,  being  under  His
superintendence.  As  stated  in  the  Brahma-saàhitä,  He  is  the  cause  of  all
causes.

TEXT  44

TaSMaaTPa[<aMYa Pa[i<aDaaYa k-aYa& Pa[SaadYae TvaMahMaqXaMaq@yMa( )

iPaTaev Pau}aSYa Sa%ev Sa:Yau" iPa[Ya" iPa[YaaYaahRiSa dev Saae!uMa( )) 44 ))

tasmät praëamya praëidhäya käyaà
prasädaye tväm aham éçam éòyam
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuù
priyaù priyäyärhasi deva soòhum

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; praëamya—offering obeisances; praëidhäya—laying down;
käyam—the body; prasädaye—to beg mercy; tväm—unto You; aham—I;
éçam—unto the Supreme Lord; éòyam—worshipable; pitä iva—like a father;
putrasya—with a son; sakhä iva—like a friend; sakhyuù—with a friend;
priyaù—a lover; priyäyäù—with the dearmost; arhasi—You should; deva—my
Lord; soòhum—tolerate.

TRANSLATION

You are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I fall

down to offer You my respectful obeisances and ask Your mercy. As a father
tolerates the impudence of his son, or a friend tolerates the impertinence of a
friend, or a wife tolerates the familiarity of her partner, please tolerate the
wrongs I may have done You.

PURPORT

Kåñëa’s  devotees  relate  to  Kåñëa  in  various  relationships;  one  might  treat
Kåñëa  as  a  son,  or  one  might  treat  Kåñëa  as  a  husband,  as  a  friend,  or  as  a
master. Kåñëa and Arjuna are related in friendship. As the father tolerates, or
the husband or a master tolerates, so Kåñëa tolerates.

TEXT  45

Ad*íPaUv| ôizTaae_iSMa d*îa >aYaeNa c Pa[VYaiQaTa& MaNaae Mae )

Tadev Mae dXaRYa dev æPa& Pa[Saqd deveXa JaGaiàvaSa )) 45 ))

adåñöa-pürvaà håñito ’smi dåñövä
bhayena ca pravyathitaà mano me
tad eva me darçaya deva rüpaà
praséda deveça jagan-niväsa

SYNONYMS

adåñöa-pürvam—never seen before; håñitaù—gladdened; asmi—I am;
dåñövä—by seeing; bhayena—out of fear; ca—also; pravyathitam—perturbed;
manaù—mind; me—my; tat—that; eva—certainly; me—unto me;
darçaya—show; deva—O Lord; rüpam—the form; praséda—just be gracious;
deva-éça—O Lord of lords; jagat-niväsa—O refuge of the universe.

TRANSLATION

After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am
gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear. Therefore
please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your form as the
Personality of Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of the universe.

PURPORT

Arjuna is always in confidence with Kåñëa because he is a very dear friend,
and as a dear friend is gladdened by his friend’s opulence, Arjuna is very joyful
to  see  that  his  friend  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  can
show such a wonderful universal form. But at the same time, after seeing that
universal form, he is afraid that he has committed so many offenses to Kåñëa
out  of  his  unalloyed  friendship.  Thus  his  mind  is  disturbed  out  of  fear,
although  he  had  no  reason  to  fear.  Arjuna  therefore is asking Kåñëa to show
His  Näräyaëa  form,  because  He  can  assume  any  form.  This  universal  form  is
material  and  temporary,  as  the  material  world  is  temporary.  But  in  the
Vaikuëöha  planets  He  has  His  transcendental  form  with  four  hands  as
Näräyaëa. There are innumerable planets in the spiritual sky, and in each of
them Kåñëa is present by His plenary manifestations of different names. Thus
Arjuna desired to see one of the forms manifest in the Vaikuëöha planets. Of
course in each Vaikuëöha planet the form of Näräyaëa is four-handed, but the
four  hands  hold  different  arrangements  of  symbols—the  conchshell,  mace,
lotus and disc. According to the different hands these four things are held in,

the  Näräyaëas  are  variously  named.  All  of  these  forms  are  one  with  Kåñëa;
therefore Arjuna requests to see His four-handed feature.

TEXT  46

ik-rqi$=Na& GaidNa& c§-hSTa‚ iMaC^aiMa Tva& d]íuMah& TaQaEv )

TaeNaEv æPae<a cTau>auRJaeNa Sahóbahae >av ivìMaUTaeR )) 46 ))

kiréöinaà gadinaà cakra-hastam
icchämi tväà drañöum ahaà tathaiva
tenaiva rüpeëa catur-bhujena
sahasra-bäho bhava viçva-mürte

SYNONYMS

kiréöinam—with helmet; gadinam—with club; cakra-hastam—disc in hand;
icchämi—I wish; tväm—You; drañöum—to see; aham—I; tathä eva—in that
position; tena eva—in that; rüpeëa—form; catuù-bhujena—four-handed;
sahasra-bäho—O thousand-handed one; bhava—just become; viçva-mürte—O
universal form.

TRANSLATION

O universal form, O thousand-armed Lord, I wish to see You in Your
four-armed form, with helmeted head and with club, wheel, conch and lotus
flower in Your hands. I long to see You in that form.

PURPORT

In  the  Brahma-saàhitä  (5.39)  it  is  stated,  rämädi-mürtiñu  kalä-niyamena
tiñöhan: the Lord is eternally situated in hundreds and thousands of forms, and
the  main  forms  are  those  like  Räma,  Nåsiàha,  Näräyaëa,  etc.  There  are
innumerable forms. But Arjuna knew that Kåñëa is the original Personality of
Godhead assuming His temporary universal form. He is now asking to see the

form  of  Näräyaëa,  a  spiritual  form.  This  verse  establishes  without  any  doubt
the statement of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam that Kåñëa is the original Personality
of Godhead and all other features originate from Him. He is not different from
His plenary expansions, and He is God in any of His innumerable forms. In all
of these forms He is fresh like a young man. That is the constant feature of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who knows Kåñëa becomes free at once
from all contamination of the material world.

TEXT  47

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

MaYaa Pa[SaàeNa TavaJauRNaed& æPa& Par& diXaRTaMaaTMaYaaeGaaTa( )

TaeJaaeMaYa& ivìMaNaNTaMaaÛ& YaNMae TvdNYaeNa Na d*íPaUvRMa( )) 47 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
mayä prasannena tavärjunedaà
rüpaà paraà darçitam ätma-yogät
tejo-mayaà viçvam anantam ädyaà
yan me tvad anyena na dåñöa-pürvam

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayä—by Me;
prasannena—happily; tava—unto you; arjuna—O Arjuna; idam—this;
rüpam—form; param—transcendental; darçitam—shown; ätma-yogät—by My
internal potency; tejaù-mayam—full of effulgence; viçvam—the entire
universe; anantam—unlimited; ädyam—original; yat—that which; me—My;
tvat anyena—besides you; na dåñöa-pürvam—no one has previously seen.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, happily have I

shown you, by My internal potency, this supreme universal form within the
material world. No one before you has ever seen this primal form, unlimited and

full of glaring effulgence.

PURPORT

Arjuna  wanted  to  see  the  universal  form  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  so  Lord
Kåñëa, out of His mercy upon His devotee Arjuna, showed His universal form,
full  of  effulgence  and  opulence.  This  form  was  glaring  like  the  sun,  and  its
many  faces  were  rapidly  changing.  Kåñëa  showed  this  form  just  to  satisfy  the
desire  of  His  friend  Arjuna.  This  form  was  manifested  by  Kåñëa  through  His
internal  potency,  which  is  inconceivable  by  human  speculation.  No  one  had
seen this universal form of the Lord before Arjuna, but because the form was
shown to Arjuna, other devotees in the heavenly planets and in other planets
in  outer  space  could  also  see  it.  They  had  not  seen  it  before,  but  because  of
Arjuna they were also able to see it. In other words, all the disciplic devotees of
the  Lord  could  see  the  universal  form  which  was  shown  to  Arjuna  by  the
mercy  of  Kåñëa.  Someone  has  commented  that  this  form  was  shown  to
Duryodhana  also  when  Kåñëa  went  to  Duryodhana  to  negotiate  for  peace.
Unfortunately,  Duryodhana  did  not  accept  the  peace  offer,  but  at  that  time
Kåñëa  manifested  some  of  His  universal  forms.  But  those  forms  are  different
from this one shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that no one had ever seen this
form before.

TEXT  48

Na vedYajaDYaYaNaENaR daNaE‚ NaR c i§-Yaai>aNaR TaPaaei>aåGa]E" )

Wv&æPa" XaKYa Ah& Na*l/aeke- d]íu& TvdNYaeNa ku-åPa[vqr )) 48 ))

na veda-yajïädhyayanair na dänair
na ca kriyäbhir na tapobhir ugraiù
evaà-rüpaù çakya ahaà nå-loke
drañöuà tvad anyena kuru-pravéra

SYNONYMS

na—never; veda-yajïa—by sacrifice; adhyayanaiù—or Vedic study;
na—never; dänaiù—by charity; na—never; ca—also; kriyäbhiù—by pious
activities; na—never; tapobhiù—by serious penances; ugraiù—severe;
evam-rüpaù—in this form; çakyaù—can; aham—I; nå-loke—in this material
world; drañöum—be seen; tvat—than you; anyena—by another;
kuru-pravéra—O best among the Kuru warriors.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this universal
form of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor by performing sacrifices,
nor by charity, nor by pious activities, nor by severe penances can I be seen in
this form in the material world.

PURPORT

The  divine  vision  in  this  connection  should  be  clearly  understood.  Who
can  have  divine  vision?  Divine  means  godly.  Unless  one  attains  the  status  of
divinity as a demigod, he cannot have divine vision. And what is a demigod? It
is stated in the Vedic scriptures that those who are devotees of Lord Viñëu are
demigods (viñëu-bhaktäù småtä deväù). Those who are atheistic, i.e., who do not
believe  in  Viñëu,  or  who  recognize  only  the  impersonal  part  of  Kåñëa  as  the
Supreme, cannot have the divine vision. It is not possible to decry Kåñëa and
at  the  same  time  have  the  divine  vision.  One  cannot  have  the  divine  vision
without  becoming  divine.  In  other  words,  those  who  have  divine  vision  can
also see like Arjuna.

The  Bhagavad-gétä  gives  the  description  of  the  universal  form.  Although
this  description  was  unknown  to  everyone  before  Arjuna,  now  one  can  have
some idea of the viçva-rüpa after this incident. Those who are actually divine
can  see  the  universal  form  of  the  Lord.  But  one  cannot  be  divine  without
being a pure devotee of Kåñëa. The devotees, however, who are actually in the
divine  nature  and  who  have  divine  vision,  are  not  very  much  interested  in
seeing  the  universal  form  of  the  Lord.  As  described  in  the  previous  verse,
Arjuna  desired  to  see  the  four-handed  form  of  Lord  Kåñëa  as  Viñëu,  and  he

was actually afraid of the universal form.

In 

are 

just 

there 

this  verse 

significant  words, 

like
some 
veda-yajïädhyayanaiù,  which  refers  to  studying  Vedic  literature  and  the
subject  matter  of  sacrificial  regulations.  Veda  refers  to  all  kinds  of  Vedic
literature,  such  as  the  four  Vedas  (Åg,  Yajur,  Säma  and  Atharva)  and  the
eighteen Puräëas, the Upaniñads and the Vedänta-sütra. One can study these
at  home  or  anywhere  else.  Similarly,  there  are  sütras—Kalpa-sütras  and
Mémäàsä-sütras—for  studying  the  method  of  sacrifice.  Dänaiù  refers  to
charity which is offered to a suitable party, such as those who are engaged in
the  transcendental  loving  service  of  the  Lord—the  brähmaëas  and  the
Vaiñëavas.  Similarly,  “pious  activities”  refers  to  the  agni-hotra  and  the
prescribed  duties  of  the  different  castes.  And  the  voluntary  acceptance  of
some bodily pains is called tapasya. So one can perform all these—can accept
bodily penances, give charity, study the Vedas, etc.—but unless he is a devotee
like  Arjuna,  it  is  not  possible  to  see  that  universal  form.  Those  who  are
impersonalists are also imagining that they are seeing the universal form of the
Lord,  but  from  Bhagavad-gétä  we  understand  that  the  impersonalists  are  not
devotees. Therefore they are unable to see the universal form of the Lord.

There  are  many  persons  who  create  incarnations.  They  falsely  claim  an
ordinary  human  to  be  an  incarnation,  but  this  is  all  foolishness.  We  should
follow  the  principles  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  otherwise  there  is  no  possibility  of
attaining  perfect  spiritual  knowledge.  Although  Bhagavad-gétä  is  considered
the preliminary study of the science of God, still it is so perfect that it enables
one to distinguish what is what. The followers of a pseudo incarnation may say
that they have also seen the transcendental incarnation of God, the universal
form, but that is unacceptable because it is clearly stated here that unless one
becomes a devotee of Kåñëa one cannot see the universal form of God. So one
first of all has to become a pure devotee of Kåñëa; then he can claim that he
can show the universal form of what he has seen. A devotee of Kåñëa cannot
accept false incarnations or followers of false incarnations.

TEXT  49

Maa Tae VYaQaa Maa c ivMaU!>aavae d*îa æPa& gaaerMaqd*x(MaMaedMa( )

VYaPaeTa>aq" Pa[qTaMaNaa" PauNaSTv& Tadev Mae æPaiMad& Pa[PaXYa )) 49 ))

mä te vyathä mä ca vimüòha-bhävo
dåñövä rüpaà ghoram édåì mamedam
vyapeta-bhéù préta-manäù punas tvaà
tad eva me rüpam idaà prapaçya

SYNONYMS

mä—let it not be; te—unto you; vyathä—trouble; mä—let it not be; ca—also;
vimüòha-bhävaù—bewilderment; dåñövä—by seeing; rüpam—form;
ghoram—horrible; édåk—as it is; mama—My; idam—this; vyapeta-bhéù—free
from all fear; préta-manäù—pleased in mind; punaù—again; tvam—you;
tat—that; eva—thus; me—My; rüpam—form; idam—this; prapaçya—just see.

TRANSLATION

You have been perturbed and bewildered by seeing this horrible feature of
Mine. Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free again from all disturbances.
With a peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.

PURPORT

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gétä Arjuna was worried about killing Bhéñma
and  Droëa,  his  worshipful  grandfather  and  master.  But  Kåñëa  said  that  he
need  not  be  afraid  of  killing  his  grandfather.  When  the  sons  of  Dhåtaräñöra
tried  to  disrobe  Draupadé  in  the  assembly  of  the  Kurus,  Bhéñma  and  Droëa
were  silent,  and  for  such  negligence  of  duty  they  should  be  killed.  Kåñëa
showed His universal form to Arjuna just to show him that these people were
already  killed  for  their  unlawful  action.  That  scene  was  shown  to  Arjuna
because  devotees  are  always  peaceful  and  they  cannot  perform  such  horrible
actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universal form was shown; now
Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Kåñëa showed him. A devotee

is  not  much  interested  in  the  universal  form,  for  it  does  not  enable  one  to
reciprocate  loving  feelings.  Either  a  devotee  wants  to  offer  his  respectful
worshipful feelings, or he wants to see the two-handed Kåñëa form so that he
can reciprocate in loving service with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  50

SaÅYa ovac )

wTYaJauRNa& vaSaudevSTaQaae¤-a Svk&- æPa& dXaRYaaMaaSa >aUYa" )

AaìaSaYaaMaaSa c >aqTaMaeNa& >aUTva PauNa" SaaEMYavPauMaRhaTMaa )) 50 ))

saïjaya uväca
ity arjunaà väsudevas tathoktvä
svakaà rüpaà darçayäm äsa bhüyaù
äçväsayäm äsa ca bhétam enaà
bhütvä punaù saumya-vapur mahätmä

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; iti—thus; arjunam—unto Arjuna;
väsudevaù—Kåñëa; tathä—in that way; uktvä—speaking; svakam—His own;
rüpam—form; darçayäm äsa—showed; bhüyaù—again; äçväsayäm
äsa—encouraged; ca—also; bhétam—fearful; enam—him; bhütvä—becoming;
punaù—again; saumya-vapuù—the beautiful form; mahä-ätmä—the great one.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said to Dhåtaräñöra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa,
having spoken thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form and at last
showed His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearful Arjuna.

PURPORT

When  Kåñëa  appeared  as  the  son  of  Vasudeva  and  Devaké,  He  first  of  all

appeared as four-armed Näräyaëa, but when He was requested by His parents,
He transformed Himself into an ordinary child in appearance. Similarly, Kåñëa
knew that Arjuna was not interested in seeing a four-handed form, but since
Arjuna  asked  to  see  this  four-handed  form,  Kåñëa  also  showed  him  this  form
again  and  then  showed  Himself  in  His  two-handed  form.  The  word
saumya-vapuù  is  very  significant.  Saumya-vapuù  is  a  very  beautiful  form;  it  is
known  as  the  most  beautiful  form.  When  He  was  present,  everyone  was
attracted  simply  by  Kåñëa’s  form,  and  because  Kåñëa  is  the  director  of  the
universe,  He  just  banished  the  fear  of  Arjuna,  His  devotee,  and  showed  him
again  His  beautiful  form  of  Kåñëa.  In  the Brahma-saàhitä  (5.38)  it  is  stated,
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena:  only  a  person  whose  eyes  are  smeared
with the ointment of love can see the beautiful form of Çré Kåñëa.

TEXT  51

AJauRNa ovac )

d*îed& MaaNauz& æPa& Tav SaaEMYa& JaNaadRNa )

wdaNaqMaiSMa Sa&v*ta" SaceTaa" Pa[k*-iTa& GaTa" )) 51 ))

arjuna uväca
dåñövedaà mänuñaà rüpaà
tava saumyaà janärdana
idäném asmi saàvåttaù
sa-cetäù prakåtià gataù

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; dåñövä—seeing; idam—this; mänuñam—human;
rüpam—form; tava—Your; saumyam—very beautiful; janärdana—O chastiser
of the enemies; idäném—now; asmi—I am; saàvåttaù—settled; sa-cetäù—in
my consciousness; prakåtim—to my own nature; gataù—returned.

TRANSLATION

When Arjuna thus saw Kåñëa in His original form, he said: O Janärdana,
seeing this humanlike form, so very beautiful, I am now composed in mind, and
I am restored to my original nature.

PURPORT

Here the words mänuñaà rüpam clearly indicate the Supreme Personality of
Godhead to be originally two-handed. Those who deride Kåñëa as if He were
an  ordinary  person  are  shown  here  to  be  ignorant  of  His  divine  nature.  If
Kåñëa is like an ordinary human being, then how is it possible for Him to show
the universal form and again to show the four-handed Näräyaëa form? So it is
very  clearly  stated  in  Bhagavad-gétä  that  one  who  thinks  that  Kåñëa  is  an
ordinary  person  and  who  misguides  the  reader  by  claiming  that  it  is  the
impersonal  Brahman  within  Kåñëa  speaking  is  doing  the  greatest  injustice.
Kåñëa has actually shown His universal form and His four-handed Viñëu form.
So how can He be an ordinary human being? A pure devotee is not confused
by misguiding commentaries on Bhagavad-gétä because he knows what is what.
The original verses of Bhagavad-gétä are as clear as the sun; they do not require
lamplight from foolish commentators.

TEXT  52

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

SaududRXaRiMad& æPa& d*ívaNaiSa YaNMaMa )

deva APYaSYa æPaSYa iNaTYa& dXaRNak-ax(i+a<a" )) 52 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
su-durdarçam idaà rüpaà
dåñöavän asi yan mama
devä apy asya rüpasya
nityaà darçana-käìkñiëaù

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
su-durdarçam—very difficult to see; idam—this; rüpam—form; dåñöavän
asi—as you have seen; yat—which; mama—of Mine; deväù—the demigods;
api—also; asya—this; rüpasya—form; nityam—eternally;
darçana-käìkñiëaù—aspiring to see.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, this form of
Mine you are now seeing is very difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever
seeking the opportunity to see this form, which is so dear.

PURPORT

In  the  forty-eighth  verse  of  this  chapter  Lord  Kåñëa  concluded  revealing
His  universal  form  and  informed  Arjuna  that  this  form  is  not  possible  to  be
seen  by  so  many  pious  activities,  sacrifices,  etc.  Now  here  the  word
su-durdarçam  is  used,  indicating  that  Kåñëa’s  two-handed  form  is  still  more
confidential. One may be able to see the universal form of Kåñëa by adding a
little tinge of devotional service to various activities like penances, Vedic study
and philosophical speculation. It may be possible, but without a tinge of bhakti
one  cannot  see;  that  has  already  been  explained.  Still,  beyond  that  universal
form, the form of Kåñëa with two hands is still more difficult to see, even for
demigods  like  Brahmä  and  Lord  Çiva.  They  desire  to  see  Him,  and  we  have
evidence  in  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  that  when  He  was  supposed  to  be  in  the
womb  of  His  mother,  Devaké,  all  the  demigods  from  heaven  came  to  see  the
marvel of Kåñëa, and they offered nice prayers to the Lord, although He was
not at that time visible to them. They waited to see Him. A foolish person may
deride  Him,  thinking  Him  an  ordinary  person,  and  may  offer  respect  not  to
Him  but  to  the  impersonal  “something”  within  Him,  but  these  are  all
nonsensical  postures.  Kåñëa  in  His  two-armed  form  is  actually  desired  to  be

seen by demigods like Brahmä and Çiva.

In Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) it is also confirmed, avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà
tanum äçritaù: He is not visible to the foolish persons who deride Him. Kåñëa’s
body,  as  confirmed  by  Brahma-saàhitä  and  confirmed  by  Kåñëa  Himself  in
Bhagavad-gétä, is completely spiritual and full of bliss and eternality. His body
is  never  like  a  material  body.  But  for  some  who  make  a  study  of  Kåñëa  by
reading Bhagavad-gétä or similar Vedic scriptures, Kåñëa is a problem. For one
using a material process, Kåñëa is considered to be a great historical personality
and very learned philosopher, but He is an ordinary man, and even though He
was so powerful He had to accept a material body. Ultimately they think that
the  Absolute  Truth  is  impersonal;  therefore  they  think  that  from  His
impersonal feature He assumed a personal feature attached to material nature.
This is a materialistic calculation of the Supreme Lord. Another calculation is
speculative. Those who are in search of knowledge also speculate on Kåñëa and
consider  Him  to  be  less  important  than  the  universal  form  of  the  Supreme.
Thus  some  think  that  the  universal  form  of  Kåñëa  which  was  manifested  to
Arjuna  is  more  important  than  His  personal  form.  According  to  them,  the
personal form of the Supreme is something imaginary. They believe that in the
ultimate  issue,  the  Absolute  Truth  is  not  a  person.  But  the  transcendental
process is described in Bhagavad-gétä, Chapter Four: to hear about Kåñëa from
authorities. That is the actual Vedic process, and those who are actually in the
Vedic  line  hear  about  Kåñëa  from  authority,  and  by  repeated  hearing  about
Him, Kåñëa becomes dear. As we have several times discussed, Kåñëa is covered
by  His  yoga-mäyä  potency.  He  is  not  to  be  seen  or  revealed  to  anyone  and
everyone.  Only  by  one  to  whom  He  reveals  Himself  can  He  be  seen.  This  is
confirmed in Vedic literature; for one who is a surrendered soul, the Absolute
Truth can actually be understood. The transcendentalist, by continuous Kåñëa
consciousness  and  by  devotional  service  to  Kåñëa,  can  have  his  spiritual  eyes
opened and can see Kåñëa by revelation. Such a revelation is not possible even
for the demigods; therefore it is difficult even for the demigods to understand
Kåñëa, and the advanced demigods are always in hope of seeing Kåñëa in His
two-handed form. The conclusion is that although to see the universal form of
Kåñëa is very, very difficult and not possible for anyone and everyone, it is still

more difficult to understand His personal form as Çyämasundara.

TEXT  53

Naah& vedENaR TaPaSaa Na daNaeNa Na ceJYaYaa )

XaKYa Wv&ivDaae d]íu& d*ívaNaiSa Maa& YaQaa )) 53 ))

nähaà vedair na tapasä
na dänena na cejyayä
çakya evaà-vidho drañöuà
dåñöavän asi mäà yathä

SYNONYMS

na—never; aham—I; vedaiù—by study of the Vedas; na—never; tapasä—by
serious penances; na—never; dänena—by charity; na—never; ca—also;
ijyayä—by worship; çakyaù—it is possible; evam-vidhaù—like this;
drañöum—to see; dåñöavän—seeing; asi—you are; mäm—Me; yathä—as.

TRANSLATION

The form you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be understood

simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing serious penances, nor by
charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means that one can see Me as I am.

PURPORT

Kåñëa  first  appeared  before  His  parents  Devaké  and  Vasudeva  in  a
four-handed  form,  and  then  He  transformed  Himself  into  the  two-handed
form. This mystery is very difficult to understand for those who are atheists or
who  are  devoid  of  devotional  service.  For  scholars  who  have  simply  studied
Vedic  literature  by  way  of  grammatical  knowledge  or  mere  academic
qualifications, Kåñëa is not possible to understand. Nor is He to be understood
by  persons  who  officially  go  to  the  temple  to  offer  worship.  They  make  their

visit,  but  they  cannot  understand  Kåñëa  as  He  is.  Kåñëa  can  be  understood
only through the path of devotional service, as explained by Kåñëa Himself in
the next verse.

TEXT  54

>a¢-ya TvNaNYaYaa XaKYa AhMaev&ivDaae_JauRNa )

jaTau& d]íu& c TatveNa Pa[veíu& c ParNTaPa )) 54 ))

bhaktyä tv ananyayä çakya
aham evaà-vidho ’rjuna
jïätuà drañöuà ca tattvena
praveñöuà ca parantapa

SYNONYMS

bhaktyä—by devotional service; tu—but; ananyayä—without being mixed
with fruitive activities or speculative knowledge; çakyaù—possible; aham—I;
evam-vidhaù—like this; arjuna—O Arjuna; jïätum—to know; drañöum—to
see; ca—and; tattvena—in fact; praveñöum—to enter into; ca—also;
parantapa—O mighty-armed one.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be understood as

I am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly. Only in this way can
you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.

PURPORT

Kåñëa  can  be  understood  only  by  the  process  of  undivided  devotional
service.  He  explicitly  explains  this  in  this  verse  so  that  unauthorized
commentators, who try to understand Bhagavad-gétä by the speculative process,
will  know  that  they  are  simply  wasting  their  time.  No  one  can  understand

Kåñëa  or  how  He  came  from  parents  in  a  four-handed  form  and  at  once
changed  Himself  into  a  two-handed  form.  These  things  are  very  difficult  to
understand by study of the Vedas or by philosophical speculation. Therefore it
is clearly stated here that no one can see Him or enter into understanding of
these  matters.  Those  who,  however,  are  very  experienced  students  of  Vedic
literature  can  learn  about  Him  from  the  Vedic  literature  in  so  many  ways.
There are so many rules and regulations, and if one at all wants to understand
Kåñëa, he must follow the regulative principles described in the authoritative
literature. One can perform penance in accordance with those principles. For
example, to undergo serious penances one may observe fasting on Janmäñöamé,
the  day  on  which  Kåñëa  appeared,  and  on  the  two  days  of  Ekädaçé  (the
eleventh  day  after  the  new  moon  and  the  eleventh  day  after  the  full  moon).
As  far  as  charity  is  concerned,  it  is  plain  that  charity  should  be  given  to  the
devotees  of  Kåñëa  who  are  engaged  in  His  devotional  service  to  spread  the
Kåñëa  philosophy,  or  Kåñëa  consciousness,  throughout  the  world.  Kåñëa
consciousness is a benediction to humanity. Lord Caitanya was appreciated by
Rüpa  Gosvämé  as  the  most  munificent  man  of  charity  because  love  of  Kåñëa,
which is very difficult to achieve, was distributed freely by Him. So if one gives
some  amount  of  his  money  to  persons  involved  in  distributing  Kåñëa
consciousness, that charity, given to spread Kåñëa consciousness, is the greatest
charity in the world. And if one worships as prescribed in the temple (in the
temples in India there is always some statue, usually of Viñëu or Kåñëa), that is
a  chance  to  progress  by  offering  worship  and  respect  to  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  For  the  beginners  in  devotional  service  to  the  Lord,
temple  worship  is  essential,  and  this  is  confirmed  in  the  Vedic  literature
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23):

yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
 [ÇU 6.23(881)]

One who has unflinching devotion for the Supreme Lord and is directed by

the  spiritual  master,  in  whom  he  has  similar  unflinching  faith,  can  see  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by revelation. One cannot understand Kåñëa
by mental speculation. For one who does not take personal training under the
guidance  of  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master,  it  is  impossible  to  even  begin  to
understand  Kåñëa.  The  word  tu  is  specifically  used  here  to  indicate  that  no
other  process  can  be  used,  can  be  recommended,  or  can  be  successful  in
understanding Kåñëa.

The  personal  forms  of  Kåñëa,  the  two-handed  form  and  the  four-handed,
are completely different from the temporary universal form shown to Arjuna.
The  four-handed  form  of  Näräyaëa  and  the  two-handed  form  of  Kåñëa  are
eternal and transcendental, whereas the universal form exhibited to Arjuna is
temporary.  The  very  word  sudurdarçam,  meaning  “difficult  to  see,”  suggests
that  no  one  had  seen  that  universal  form.  It  also  suggests  that  amongst  the
devotees  there  was  no  necessity  of  showing  it.  That  form  was  exhibited  by
Kåñëa  at  the  request  of  Arjuna  so  that  in  the  future,  when  one  represents
himself as an incarnation of God, people can ask to see his universal form.

The  word  na,  used  repeatedly  in  the  previous  verse,  indicates  that  one
should not be very much proud of such credentials as an academic education in
Vedic literature. One must take to the devotional service of Kåñëa. Only then
can one attempt to write commentaries on Bhagavad-gétä.

Kåñëa  changes  from  the  universal  form  to  the  four-handed  form  of
Näräyaëa and then to His own natural form of two hands. This indicates that
the  four-handed  forms  and  other  forms  mentioned  in  Vedic  literature  are  all
emanations  of  the  original  two-handed  Kåñëa.  He  is  the  origin  of  all
emanations.  Kåñëa  is  distinct  even  from  these  forms,  what  to  speak  of  the
impersonal  conception.  As  far  as  the  four-handed  forms  of  Kåñëa  are
concerned, it is stated clearly that even the most identical four-handed form of
Kåñëa (which is known as Mahä-Viñëu, who is lying on the cosmic ocean and
from  whose  breathing  so  many  innumerable  universes  are  passing  out  and
entering)  is  also  an  expansion  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  As  stated  in  the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.48),

yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya
jévanti loma-vila-jä jagad-aëòa-näthäù

viñëur mahän sa iha yasya kalä-viçeño
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi

“The Mahä-Viñëu, into whom all the innumerable universes enter and from
whom  they  come  forth  again  simply  by  His  breathing  process,  is  a  plenary
expansion  of  Kåñëa.  Therefore  I  worship  Govinda,  Kåñëa,  the  cause  of  all
causes.” Therefore one should conclusively worship the personal form of Kåñëa
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead who has eternal bliss and knowledge.
He  is  the  source  of  all  forms  of  Viñëu,  He  is  the  source  of  all  forms  of
incarnation,  and  He  is  the  original  Supreme  Personality,  as  confirmed  in
Bhagavad-gétä.

In the Vedic literature (Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad 1.1) the following statement

appears:

sac-cid-änanda-rüpäya
kåñëäyäkliñöa-käriëe
namo vedänta-vedyäya
gurave buddhi-säkñiëe

“I  offer  my  respectful  obeisances  unto  Kåñëa,  who  has  a  transcendental
form  of  bliss,  eternity  and  knowledge.  I  offer  my  respect  to  Him,  because
understanding  Him  means  understanding  the  Vedas  and  He  is  therefore  the
supreme spiritual master.” Then it is said, kåñëo vai paramaà daivatam: “Kåñëa
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” (Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad 1.3) Eko vaçé
sarva-gaù  kåñëa  éòyaù:  “That  one  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  and  He  is  worshipable.”  Eko  ’pi  san  bahudhä  yo  ’vabhäti:  “Kåñëa  is
one,  but  He  is  manifested  in  unlimited  forms  and  expanded  incarnations.”
(Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad 1.21)

The Brahma-saàhitä (5.1) says,

éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is Kåñëa, who has a body of eternity,

knowledge  and  bliss.  He  has  no  beginning,  for  He  is  the  beginning  of
everything. He is the cause of all causes.”

Elsewhere it is said, yaträvatérëaà kåñëäkhyaà paraà brahma naräkåti: “The
Supreme  Absolute  Truth  is  a  person,  His  name  is  Kåñëa,  and  He  sometimes
descends  on  this  earth.”  Similarly,  in  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  we  find  a
description  of  all  kinds  of  incarnations  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  and  in  this  list  the  name  of  Kåñëa  also  appears.  But  then  it  is  said
that  this  Kåñëa  is  not  an  incarnation  of  God  but  is  the  original  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  Himself  (ete  cäàça-kaläù  puàsaù  kåñëas  tu  bhagavän
svayam).

Similarly, in Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says, mattaù parataraà nänyat: “There
is nothing superior to My form as the Personality of Godhead Kåñëa.” He also
says elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä, aham ädir hi devänäm: “I am the origin of all
the  demigods.”  And  after  understanding  Bhagavad-gétä  from  Kåñëa,  Arjuna
also  confirms  this  in  the  following  words:  paraà  brahma  paraà  dhäma
pavitram-paramaà bhavän, “I now fully understand that You are the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  the  Absolute  Truth,  and  that  You  are  the  refuge  of
everything.”  Therefore  the  universal  form  which  Kåñëa  showed  to  Arjuna  is
not  the  original  form  of  God.  The  original  is  the  Kåñëa  form.  The  universal
form, with its thousands and thousands of heads and hands, is manifest just to
draw the attention of those who have no love for God. It is not God’s original
form.

The universal form is not attractive for pure devotees, who are in love with
the  Lord  in  different  transcendental  relationships.  The  Supreme  Godhead
exchanges  transcendental  love  in  His  original  form  of  Kåñëa.  Therefore  to
Arjuna,  who  was  so  intimately  related  with  Kåñëa  in  friendship,  this  form  of
the  universal  manifestation  was  not  pleasing;  rather,  it  was  fearful.  Arjuna,
who was a constant companion of Kåñëa’s, must have had transcendental eyes;
he was not an ordinary man. Therefore he was not captivated by the universal
form. This form may seem wonderful to persons who are involved in elevating
themselves by fruitive activities, but to persons who are engaged in devotional
service the two-handed form of Kåñëa is the most dear.

TEXT  55

MaTk-MaRk*-NMaTParMaae MaÙ¢-" Sa®viJaRTa" )

iNavŒr" SavR>aUTaezu Ya" Sa MaaMaeiTa Paa<@v )) 55 ))

mat-karma-kån mat-paramo
mad-bhaktaù saìga-varjitaù
nirvairaù sarva-bhüteñu
yaù sa mäm eti päëòava

SYNONYMS

mat-karma-kåt—engaged in doing My work; mat-paramaù—considering Me
the Supreme; mat-bhaktaù—engaged in My devotional service;
saìga-varjitaù—freed from the contamination of fruitive activities and mental
speculation; nirvairaù—without an enemy; sarva-bhüteñu—among all living
entities; yaù—one who; saù—he; mäm—unto Me; eti—comes; päëòava—O
son of Päëòu.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, he who engages in My pure devotional service, free from
the contaminations of fruitive activities and mental speculation, he who works
for Me, who makes Me the supreme goal of his life, and who is friendly to every
living being—he certainly comes to Me.

PURPORT

Anyone  who  wants  to  approach  the  supreme  of  all  the  Personalities  of
Godhead,  on  the  Kåñëaloka  planet  in  the  spiritual  sky,  and  be  intimately
connected  with  the  Supreme  Personality,  Kåñëa,  must  take  this  formula,  as
stated  by  the  Supreme  Himself.  Therefore,  this  verse  is  considered  to  be  the
essence  of  Bhagavad-gétä.  The  Bhagavad-gétä  is  a  book  directed  to  the
conditioned souls, who are engaged in the material world with the purpose of

lording  it  over  nature  and  who  do  not  know  of  the  real,  spiritual  life.  The
Bhagavad-gétä is meant to show how one can understand his spiritual existence
and  his  eternal  relationship  with  the  supreme  spiritual  personality  and  to
teach one how to go back home, back to Godhead. Now here is the verse which
clearly  explains  the  process  by  which  one  can  attain  success  in  his  spiritual
activity: devotional service.

As  far  as  work  is  concerned,  one  should  transfer  his  energy  entirely  to

Kåñëa conscious activities. As stated in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (2.255),

anäsaktasya viñayän
yathärham upayuïjataù
nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe
yuktaà vairägyam ucyate

No work should be done by any man except in relationship to Kåñëa. This is
called kåñëa-karma. One may be engaged in various activities, but one should
not  be  attached  to  the  result  of  his  work;  the  result  should  be  done  only  for
Him.  For  example,  one  may  be  engaged  in  business,  but  to  transform  that
activity into Kåñëa consciousness, one has to do business for Kåñëa. If Kåñëa is
the  proprietor  of  the  business,  then  Kåñëa  should  enjoy  the  profit  of  the
business.  If  a  businessman  is  in  possession  of  thousands  and  thousands  of
dollars, and if he has to offer all this to Kåñëa, he can do it. This is work for
Kåñëa. Instead of constructing a big building for his sense gratification, he can
construct a nice temple for Kåñëa, and he can install the Deity of Kåñëa and
arrange  for  the  Deity’s  service,  as  is  outlined  in  the  authorized  books  of
devotional service. This is all kåñëa-karma. One should not be attached to the
result  of  his  work,  but  the  result  should  be  offered  to  Kåñëa,  and  one  should
accept as prasädam the remnants of offerings to Kåñëa. If one constructs a very
big  building  for  Kåñëa  and  installs  the  Deity  of  Kåñëa,  one  is  not  prohibited
from  living  there,  but  it  is  understood  that  the  proprietor  of  the  building  is
Kåñëa.  That  is  called  Kåñëa  consciousness.  If,  however,  one  is  not  able  to
construct a temple for Kåñëa, one can engage himself in cleansing the temple
of  Kåñëa;  that  is  also  kåñëa-karma.  One  can  cultivate  a  garden.  Anyone  who
has land—in India, at least, any poor man has a certain amount of land—can

utilize  that  for  Kåñëa  by  growing  flowers  to  offer  Him.  One  can  sow  tulasé
plants,  because  tulasé  leaves  are  very  important  and  Kåñëa  has  recommended
this  in  Bhagavad-gétä.  Patraà  puñpaà  phalaà  toyam.  Kåñëa  desires  that  one
offer Him either a leaf, or a flower, or fruit, or a little water—and by such an
offering He is satisfied. This leaf especially refers to the tulasé. So one can sow
tulasé and pour water on the plant. Thus, even the poorest man can engage in
the service of Kåñëa. These are some of the examples of how one can engage in
working for Kåñëa.

The word mat-paramaù refers to one who considers the association of Kåñëa
in His supreme abode to be the highest perfection of life. Such a person does
not  wish  to  be  elevated  to  the  higher  planets  such  as  the  moon  or  sun  or
heavenly planets, or even the highest planet of this universe, Brahmaloka. He
has  no  attraction  for  that.  He  is  only  attracted  to  being  transferred  to  the
spiritual sky. And even in the spiritual sky he is not satisfied with merging into
the glowing brahmajyoti effulgence, for he wants to enter the highest spiritual
planet,  namely  Kåñëaloka,  Goloka  Våndävana.  He  has  full  knowledge  of  that
planet,  and  therefore  he  is  not  interested  in  any  other.  As  indicated  by  the
word  mad-bhaktaù,  he  fully  engages  in  devotional  service,  specifically  in  the
nine  processes  of  devotional  engagement:  hearing,  chanting,  remembering,
worshiping,  serving  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Lord,  offering  prayers,  carrying  out
the orders of the Lord, making friends with Him, and surrendering everything
to Him. One can engage in all nine devotional processes, or eight, or seven, or
at least in one, and that will surely make one perfect.

The term saìga-varjitaù is very significant. One should disassociate himself
from persons who are against Kåñëa. Not only are the atheistic persons against
Kåñëa, but so also are those who are attracted to fruitive activities and mental
speculation.  Therefore  the  pure  form  of  devotional  service  is  described  in
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.1.11) as follows:

anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänu-
çélanaà bhaktir uttamä
 [Madhya 19.167]

In  this  verse  Çréla  Rüpa  Gosvämé  clearly  states  that  if  anyone  wants  to
execute  unalloyed  devotional  service,  he  must  be  freed  from  all  kinds  of
material contamination. He must be freed from the association of persons who
are  addicted  to  fruitive  activities  and  mental  speculation.  When,  freed  from
such  unwanted  association  and  from  the  contamination  of  material  desires,
one  favorably  cultivates  knowledge  of  Kåñëa,  that  is  called  pure  devotional
service.  Änukülyasya  saìkalpaù  prätikülyasya  varjanam  (Hari-bhakti-viläsa
11.676).  One  should  think  of  Kåñëa  and  act  for  Kåñëa  favorably,  not
unfavorably.  Kaàsa  was  an  enemy  of  Kåñëa’s.  From  the  very  beginning  of
Kåñëa’s birth, Kaàsa planned in so many ways to kill Him, and because he was
always  unsuccessful,  he  was  always  thinking  of  Kåñëa.  Thus  while  working,
while  eating  and  while  sleeping,  he  was  always  Kåñëa  conscious  in  every
respect, but that Kåñëa consciousness was not favorable, and therefore in spite
of his always thinking of Kåñëa twenty-four hours a day, he was considered a
demon, and Kåñëa at last killed him. Of course anyone who is killed by Kåñëa
attains salvation immediately, but that is not the aim of the pure devotee. The
pure devotee does not even want salvation. He does not want to be transferred
even  to  the  highest  planet,  Goloka  Våndävana. His only objective is to serve
Kåñëa wherever he may be.

A devotee of Kåñëa is friendly to everyone. Therefore it is said here that he
has  no  enemy  (nirvairaù).  How  is  this?  A  devotee  situated  in  Kåñëa
consciousness knows that only devotional service to Kåñëa can relieve a person
from all the problems of life. He has personal experience of this, and therefore
he  wants  to  introduce  this  system,  Kåñëa  consciousness,  into  human  society.
There are many examples in history of devotees of the Lord who risked their
lives  for  the  spreading  of  God  consciousness.  The  favorite  example  is  Lord
Jesus Christ. He was crucified by the nondevotees, but he sacrificed his life for
spreading God consciousness. Of course, it would be superficial to understand
that  he  was  killed.  Similarly,  in  India  also  there  are  many  examples,  such  as
Öhäkura  Haridäsa  and  Prahläda  Mahäräja.  Why  such  risk?  Because  they
wanted  to  spread  Kåñëa  consciousness,  and  it  is  difficult.  A  Kåñëa  conscious
person  knows  that  if  a  man  is  suffering  it  is  due  to  his  forgetfulness  of  his
eternal relationship with Kåñëa. Therefore, the highest benefit one can render

to  human  society  is  relieving  one’s  neighbor  from  all  material  problems.  In
such a way, a pure devotee is engaged in the service of the Lord. Now, we can
imagine  how  merciful  Kåñëa  is  to  those  engaged  in  His  service,  risking
everything  for  Him.  Therefore  it  is  certain  that  such  persons  must  reach  the
supreme planet after leaving the body.

In  summary,  the  universal  form  of  Kåñëa,  which  is  a  temporary
manifestation, and the form of time which devours everything, and even the
form of Viñëu, four-handed, have all been exhibited by Kåñëa. Thus Kåñëa is
the origin of all these manifestations. It is not that Kåñëa is a manifestation of
the  original  viçva-rüpa,  or  Viñëu.  Kåñëa  is  the  origin  of  all  forms.  There  are
hundreds  and  thousands  of  Viñëus,  but  for  a  devotee  no  form  of  Kåñëa  is
important  but  the  original  form,  two-handed  Çyämasundara.  In  the
Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that those who are attached to the Çyämasundara
form of Kåñëa in love and devotion can see Him always within the heart and
cannot see anything else. One should understand, therefore, that the purport
of this Eleventh Chapter is that the form of Kåñëa is essential and supreme.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eleventh Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of the Universal Form.

- CHAPTER 12 -
Devotional Service

TEXT  1

AJauRNa ovac )

Wv& SaTaTaYau¢-a Yae >a¢-aSTva& PaYauRPaaSaTae )

Yae caPYa+arMaVYa¢&- Taeza& ke- YaaeGaivtaMaa" )) 1 ))

arjuna uväca
evaà satata-yuktä ye
bhaktäs tväà paryupäsate
ye cäpy akñaram avyaktaà
teñäà ke yoga-vittamäù

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; evam—thus; satata—always; yuktäù—engaged;
ye—those who; bhaktäù—devotees; tväm—You; paryupäsate—properly
worship; ye—those who; ca—also; api—again; akñaram—beyond the senses;
avyaktam—the unmanifested; teñäm—of them; ke—who; yoga-vit-tamäù—the
most perfect in knowledge of yoga.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: Which are considered to be more perfect, those who are
always properly engaged in Your devotional service or those who worship the
impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested?

PURPORT

Kåñëa  has  now  explained  about  the  personal,  the  impersonal  and  the
universal  and  has  described  all  kinds  of  devotees  and  yogés.  Generally,  the
transcendentalists  can  be  divided  into  two  classes.  One  is  the  impersonalist,
and the other is the personalist. The personalist devotee engages himself with
all energy in the service of the Supreme Lord. The impersonalist also engages
himself,  not  directly  in  the  service  of  Kåñëa  but  in  meditation  on  the
impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested.

We find in this chapter that of the different processes for realization of the
Absolute  Truth,  bhakti-yoga,  devotional  service,  is  the  highest.  If  one  at  all
desires  to  have  the  association  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  then

he must take to devotional service.

Those  who  worship  the  Supreme  Lord  directly  by  devotional  service  are
called  personalists.  Those  who  engage  themselves  in  meditation  on  the
impersonal  Brahman  are  called  impersonalists.  Arjuna  is  here  questioning
which  position  is  better.  There  are  different  ways  to  realize  the  Absolute
Truth,  but  Kåñëa  indicates  in  this  chapter  that  bhakti-yoga,  or  devotional
service to Him, is the highest of all. It is the most direct, and it is the easiest
means for association with the Godhead.

In the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, the Supreme Lord explained that
a  living  entity  is  not  the  material  body;  he  is  a  spiritual  spark.  And  the
Absolute Truth is the spiritual whole. In the Seventh Chapter He spoke of the
living entity as being part and parcel of the supreme whole and recommended
that  he  transfer  his  attention  fully  to  the  whole.  Then  again  in  the  Eighth
Chapter it was said that anyone who thinks of Kåñëa at the time of quitting his
body is at once transferred to the spiritual sky, to the abode of Kåñëa. And at
the  end  of  the Sixth  Chapter  the  Lord  clearly  said  that  of  all  yogés,  one  who
always  thinks  of  Kåñëa  within  himself  is  considered  the  most  perfect.  So  in
practically every chapter the conclusion has been that one should be attached
to the personal form of Kåñëa, for that is the highest spiritual realization.

Nevertheless, there are those who are not attached to the personal form of
Kåñëa.  They  are  so  firmly  detached  that  even  in  the  preparation  of
commentaries to Bhagavad-gétä they want to distract other people from Kåñëa
and  transfer  all  devotion  to  the  impersonal  brahmajyoti.  They  prefer  to
meditate on the impersonal form of the Absolute Truth, which is beyond the
reach of the senses and is not manifest.

And so, factually, there are two classes of transcendentalists. Now Arjuna is
trying to settle the question of which process is easier and which of the classes
is most perfect. In other words, he is clarifying his own position because he is
attached to the personal form of Kåñëa. He is not attached to the impersonal
Brahman.  He  wants  to  know  whether  his  position  is  secure.  The  impersonal
manifestation,  either  in  this  material  world  or  in  the  spiritual  world  of  the
Supreme  Lord,  is  a  problem  for  meditation.  Actually,  one  cannot  perfectly
conceive  of  the  impersonal  feature  of  the  Absolute  Truth.  Therefore  Arjuna

wants to say, “What is the use of such a waste of time?” Arjuna experienced in
the Eleventh Chapter that to be attached to the personal form of Kåñëa is best
because he could thus understand all other forms at the same time and there
was  no  disturbance  to  his  love  for  Kåñëa.  This  important  question  asked  of
Kåñëa  by  Arjuna  will  clarify  the  distinction  between  the  impersonal  and
personal conceptions of the Absolute Truth.

TEXT  2

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

MaYYaaveXYa MaNaae Yae Maa& iNaTYaYau¢-a oPaaSaTae )

é[ÖYaa ParYaaePaeTaaSTae Mae Yau¢-TaMaa MaTaa" )) 2 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
mayy äveçya mano ye mäà
nitya-yuktä upäsate
çraddhayä parayopetäs
te me yuktatamä matäù

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi—upon
Me; äveçya—fixing; manaù—the mind; ye—those who; mäm—Me;
nitya—always; yuktäù—engaged; upäsate—worship; çraddhayä—with faith;
parayä—transcendental; upetäù—endowed; te—they; me—by Me;
yukta-tamäù—most perfect in yoga; matäù—are considered.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Those who fix their minds on

My personal form and are always engaged in worshiping Me with great and
transcendental faith are considered by Me to be most perfect.

PURPORT

In answer to Arjuna’s question, Kåñëa clearly says that he who concentrates
upon His personal form and who worships Him with faith and devotion is to be
considered most perfect in yoga. For one in such Kåñëa consciousness there are
no material activities, because everything is done for Kåñëa. A pure devotee is
constantly engaged. Sometimes he chants, sometimes he hears or reads books
about  Kåñëa,  or  sometimes  he  cooks  prasädam  or  goes  to  the  marketplace  to
purchase  something  for  Kåñëa,  or  sometimes  he  washes  the  temple  or  the
dishes—whatever  he  does,  he  does  not  let  a  single  moment  pass  without
devoting his activities to Kåñëa. Such action is in full samädhi.

TEXTS  3–4

Yae Tv+arMaiNadeRXYaMaVYa¢&- PaYauRPaaSaTae )

SavR}aGaMaicNTYa& c kU-$=SQaMacl&/ Da]uvMa( )) 3 ))

SaiàYaMYaeiNd]YaGa]aMa& SavR}a SaMabuÖYa" )

Tae Pa[aPanuviNTa MaaMaev SavR>aUTaihTae rTaa" )) 4 ))

ye tv akñaram anirdeçyam
avyaktaà paryupäsate
sarvatra-gam acintyaà ca
küöa-stham acalaà dhruvam

sanniyamyendriya-grämaà
sarvatra sama-buddhayaù
te präpnuvanti mäm eva
sarva-bhüta-hite ratäù

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; tu—but; akñaram—that which is beyond the perception of the
senses; anirdeçyam—indefinite; avyaktam—unmanifested;

paryupäsate—completely engage in worshiping; sarvatra-gam—all-pervading;
acintyam—inconceivable; ca—also; küöa-stham—unchanging;
acalam—immovable; dhruvam—fixed; sanniyamya—controlling;
indriya-grämam—all the senses; sarvatra—everywhere;
sama-buddhayaù—equally disposed; te—they; präpnuvanti—achieve;
mäm—Me; eva—certainly; sarva-bhüta-hite—for the welfare of all living
entities; ratäù—engaged.

TRANSLATION

But those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies beyond the
perception of the senses, the all-pervading, inconceivable, unchanging, fixed and
immovable—the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth—by controlling
the various senses and being equally disposed to everyone, such persons,
engaged in the welfare of all, at last achieve Me.

PURPORT

Those who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, Kåñëa, but who
attempt  to  achieve  the  same  goal  by  an  indirect  process,  also  ultimately
achieve the same goal, Çré Kåñëa. “After many births the man of wisdom seeks
refuge  in  Me,  knowing  that  Väsudeva  is  all.”  When  a  person  comes  to  full
knowledge  after  many  births,  he  surrenders  unto  Lord  Kåñëa.  If  one
approaches  the  Godhead  by  the  method  mentioned  in  this  verse,  he  has  to
control the senses, render service to everyone and engage in the welfare of all
beings. It is inferred that one has to approach Lord Kåñëa, otherwise there is
no perfect realization. Often there is much penance involved before one fully
surrenders unto Him.

In  order  to  perceive  the  Supersoul  within  the  individual  soul,  one  has  to
cease the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working, etc. Then one
comes  to  understand  that  the  Supreme  Soul  is  present  everywhere.  Realizing
this,  one  envies  no  living  entity—he  sees  no  difference  between  man  and
animal because he sees soul only, not the outer covering. But for the common
man, this method of impersonal realization is very difficult.

TEXT  5

©e-Xaae_iDak-TarSTaezaMaVYa¢-aSa¢-ceTaSaaMa( )

AVYa¢-a ih GaiTaduR"%& dehviÙrvaPYaTae )) 5 ))

kleço ’dhikataras teñäm
avyaktäsakta-cetasäm
avyaktä hi gatir duùkhaà
dehavadbhir aväpyate

SYNONYMS

kleçaù—trouble; adhika-taraù—very much; teñäm—of them; avyakta—to the
unmanifested; äsakta—attached; cetasäm—of those whose minds;
avyaktä—toward the unmanifested; hi—certainly; gatiù—progress;
duùkham—with trouble; deha-vadbhiù—by the embodied; aväpyate—is
achieved.

TRANSLATION

For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal feature

of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To make progress in that
discipline is always difficult for those who are embodied.

PURPORT

The group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the inconceivable,
unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord are called jïäna-yogés,
and persons who are in full Kåñëa consciousness, engaged in devotional service
to  the  Lord,  are  called  bhakti-yogés.  Now,  here  the  difference  between
jïäna-yoga and bhakti-yoga is definitely expressed. The process of jïäna-yoga,
although  ultimately  bringing  one  to  the  same  goal,  is  very  troublesome,
whereas  the  path  of  bhakti-yoga,  the  process  of  being  in  direct  service  to  the

Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  is  easier  and  is  natural  for  the  embodied
soul. The individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is very difficult
for him to simply theoretically understand that he is not the body. Therefore,
the bhakti-yogé accepts the Deity of Kåñëa as worshipable because there is some
bodily  conception  fixed  in  the  mind,  which  can  thus  be  applied.  Of  course,
worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form within the temple
is not idol worship. There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may
be saguëa and nirguëa—of the Supreme possessing or not possessing attributes.
Worship  of  the  Deity  in  the  temple  is  saguëa  worship,  for  the  Lord  is
represented by material qualities. But the form of the Lord, though represented
by material qualities such as stone, wood or oil paint, is not actually material.
That is the absolute nature of the Supreme Lord.

A crude example may be given here. We may find some mailboxes on the
street, and if we post our letters in those boxes, they will naturally go to their
destination without difficulty. But any old box, or an imitation which we may
find somewhere but which is not authorized by the post office, will not do the
work.  Similarly,  God  has  an  authorized  representation  in  the  Deity  form,
which  is  called  arcä-vigraha.  This  arcä-vigraha  is  an  incarnation  of  the
Supreme  Lord.  God  will  accept  service  through  that  form.  The  Lord  is
omnipotent, all-powerful; therefore, by His incarnation as arcä-vigraha He can
accept the services of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the man in
conditioned life.

So  for  a  devotee  there  is  no  difficulty  in  approaching  the  Supreme
immediately and directly, but for those who are following the impersonal way
to  spiritual  realization  the  path  is  difficult.  They  have  to  understand  the
unmanifested representation of the Supreme through such Vedic literatures as
the  Upaniñads,  and  they  have  to  learn  the  language,  understand  the
nonperceptual feelings, and realize all these processes. This is not very easy for
a  common  man.  A  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  engaged  in  devotional
service,  simply  by  the  guidance  of  the  bona  fide  spiritual  master,  simply  by
offering regulative obeisances unto the Deity, simply by hearing the glories of
the Lord, and simply by eating the remnants of foodstuffs offered to the Lord,
realizes  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  very  easily.  There  is  no  doubt

that  the  impersonalists  are  unnecessarily  taking  a  troublesome  path  with  the
risk  of  not  realizing  the  Absolute  Truth  at  the  ultimate  end.  But  the
personalist,  without  any  risk,  trouble  or  difficulty,  approaches  the  Supreme
Personality  directly.  A  similar  passage  appears  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam.  It  is
stated  there  that  if  one  ultimately  has  to  surrender  unto  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead (this surrendering process is called bhakti), but instead
takes  the  trouble  to  understand  what  is  Brahman  and  what  is  not  Brahman
and  spends  his  whole  life  in  that  way,  the  result  is  simply  troublesome.
Therefore it is advised here that one should not take up this troublesome path
of self-realization, because there is uncertainty in the ultimate result.

A living entity is eternally an individual soul, and if he wants to merge into
the  spiritual  whole,  he  may  accomplish  the  realization  of  the  eternal  and
knowledgeable  aspects  of  his  original  nature,  but  the  blissful  portion  is  not
realized. By the grace of some devotee, such a transcendentalist, highly learned
in  the  process  of  jïäna-yoga,  may  come  to  the  point  of  bhakti-yoga,  or
devotional service. At that time, long practice in impersonalism also becomes a
source of trouble, because he cannot give up the idea. Therefore an embodied
soul  is  always  in  difficulty  with  the  unmanifest,  both  at  the  time  of  practice
and  at  the  time  of  realization.  Every  living  soul  is  partially  independent,  and
one  should  know  for  certain  that  this  unmanifested  realization  is  against  the
nature  of  his  spiritual  blissful  self.  One  should  not  take  up  this  process.  For
every individual living entity the process of Kåñëa consciousness, which entails
full engagement in devotional service, is the best way. If one wants to ignore
this  devotional  service,  there  is  the  danger  of  turning  to  atheism.  Thus  the
process of centering attention on the unmanifested, the inconceivable, which
is beyond the approach of the senses, as already expressed in this verse, should
never  be  encouraged  at  any  time,  especially  in  this  age.  It  is  not  advised  by
Lord Kåñëa.

TEXTS  6–7

Yae Tau SavaRi<a k-MaaRi<a MaiYa SaNNYaSYa MaTPara" )

ANaNYaeNaEv YaaeGaeNa Maa& DYaaYaNTa oPaaSaTae )) 6 ))

TaezaMah& SaMauÖTaaR Ma*TYauSa&SaarSaaGaraTa( )

>avaiMa Na icraTPaaQaR MaYYaaveiXaTaceTaSaaMa( )) 7 ))

ye tu sarväëi karmäëi
mayi sannyasya mat-paräù
ananyenaiva yogena
mäà dhyäyanta upäsate

teñäm ahaà samuddhartä
måtyu-saàsära-sägarät
bhavämi na cirät pärtha
mayy äveçita-cetasäm

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; tu—but; sarväëi—all; karmäëi—activities; mayi—unto Me;
sannyasya—giving up; mat-paräù—being attached to Me; ananyena—without
division; eva—certainly; yogena—by practice of such bhakti-yoga; mäm—upon
Me; dhyäyantaù—meditating; upäsate—worship; teñäm—of them; aham—I;
samuddhartä—the deliverer; måtyu—of death; saàsära—in material existence;
sägarät—from the ocean; bhavämi—I become; na—not; cirät—after a long
time; pärtha—O son of Påthä; mayi—upon Me; äveçita—fixed; cetasäm—of
those whose minds.

TRANSLATION

But those who worship Me, giving up all their activities unto Me and being

devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and always
meditating upon Me, having fixed their minds upon Me, O son of Påthä—for
them I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and death.

PURPORT

It  is  explicitly  stated  here  that  the  devotees  are  very  fortunate  to  be
delivered  very  soon  from  material  existence  by  the  Lord.  In  pure  devotional

service one comes to the realization that God is great and that the individual
soul is subordinate to Him. His duty is to render service to the Lord—and if he
does not, then he will render service to mäyä.

As stated before, the Supreme Lord can be appreciated only by devotional
service. Therefore, one should be fully devoted. One should fix his mind fully
on Kåñëa in order to achieve Him. One should work only for Kåñëa. It does not
matter in what kind of work one engages, but that work should be done only
for  Kåñëa.  That  is  the  standard  of  devotional  service.  The  devotee  does  not
desire  any  achievement  other  than  pleasing  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead. His life’s mission is to please Kåñëa, and he can sacrifice everything
for  Kåñëa’s  satisfaction,  just  as  Arjuna  did  in  the  Battle  of  Kurukñetra.  The
process is very simple: one can devote himself in his occupation and engage at
the same time in chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/
Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare  Hare.  Such  transcendental
chanting attracts the devotee to the Personality of Godhead.

The  Supreme  Lord  herein  promises  that  without  delay  He  will  deliver  a
pure  devotee  thus  engaged  from  the  ocean  of  material  existence.  Those  who
are advanced in yoga practice can willfully transfer the soul to whatever planet
they like by the yoga process, and others take the opportunity in various ways,
but  as  far  as  the  devotee  is  concerned,  it  is  clearly  stated  here  that  the  Lord
Himself  takes  him.  The  devotee  does  not  need  to  wait  to  become  very
experienced in order to transfer himself to the spiritual sky.

In the Varäha Puräëa this verse appears:

nayämi paramaà sthänam
arcir-ädi-gatià vinä
garuòa-skandham äropya
yatheccham aniväritaù

The  purport  of  this  verse  is  that  a  devotee  does  not  need  to  practice
añöäìga-yoga  in  order  to  transfer  his  soul  to  the  spiritual  planets.  The
responsibility  is  taken  by  the  Supreme  Lord  Himself.  He  clearly  states  here
that He Himself becomes the deliverer. A child is completely cared for by his
parents, and thus his position is secure. Similarly, a devotee does not need to

endeavor  to  transfer  himself  by  yoga  practice  to  other  planets.  Rather,  the
Supreme  Lord,  by  His  great  mercy,  comes  at  once,  riding  on  His  bird  carrier
Garuòa, and at once delivers the devotee from material existence. Although a
man  who  has  fallen  in  the  ocean  may  struggle  very  hard  and  may  be  very
expert in swimming, he cannot save himself. But if someone comes and picks
him up from the water, then he is easily rescued. Similarly, the Lord picks up
the devotee from this material existence. One simply has to practice the easy
process of Kåñëa consciousness and fully engage himself in devotional service.
Any intelligent man should always prefer the process of devotional service to
all other paths. In the Näräyaëéya this is confirmed as follows:

yä vai sädhana-sampattiù
puruñärtha-catuñöaye
tayä vinä tad äpnoti
naro näräyaëäçrayaù

The  purport  of  this  verse  is  that  one  should  not  engage  in  the  different
processes of fruitive activity or cultivate knowledge by the mental speculative
process.  One  who  is  devoted  to  the  Supreme  Personality  can  attain  all  the
benefits  derived  from  other  yogic  processes,  speculation,  rituals,  sacrifices,
charities, etc. That is the specific benediction of devotional service.

Simply  by  chanting  the  holy  name  of  Kåñëa—Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—a
devotee of the Lord can approach the supreme destination easily and happily,
but this destination cannot be approached by any other process of religion.
The conclusion of Bhagavad-gétä is stated in the Eighteenth Chapter:

sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
 [Bg. 18.66]

One should give up all other processes of self-realization and simply execute
devotional  service  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  That  will  enable  one  to  reach  the

highest  perfection  of  life.  There  is  no  need  for  one  to  consider  the  sinful
actions  of  his  past  life,  because  the  Supreme  Lord  fully  takes  charge  of  him.
Therefore one should not futilely try to deliver himself in spiritual realization.
Let everyone take shelter of the supreme omnipotent Godhead, Kåñëa. That is
the highest perfection of life.

TEXT  8

MaYYaev MaNa AaDaTSv MaiYa buiÖ& iNaveXaYa )

iNaviSaZYaiSa MaYYaev ATa Oß| Na Sa&XaYa" )) 8 ))

mayy eva mana ädhatsva
mayi buddhià niveçaya
nivasiñyasi mayy eva
ata ürdhvaà na saàçayaù

SYNONYMS

mayi—upon Me; eva—certainly; manaù—mind; ädhatsva—fix; mayi—upon
Me; buddhim—intelligence; niveçaya—apply; nivasiñyasi—you will live;
mayi—in Me; eva—certainly; ataù ürdhvam—thereafter; na—never;
saàçayaù—doubt.

TRANSLATION

Just fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live in Me always, without a
doubt.

PURPORT

One  who  is  engaged  in  Lord  Kåñëa’s  devotional  service  lives  in  a  direct
relationship  with  the  Supreme  Lord,  so  there  is  no  doubt  that  his  position  is
transcendental  from  the  very  beginning.  A  devotee  does  not  live  on  the

material  plane—he  lives  in  Kåñëa.  The  holy  name  of  the  Lord  and  the  Lord
are nondifferent; therefore when a devotee chants Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa and His
internal  potency  are  dancing  on  the  tongue  of  the  devotee.  When  he  offers
Kåñëa  food,  Kåñëa  directly  accepts  these  eatables,  and  the  devotee  becomes
Kåñëa-ized by eating the remnants. One who does not engage in such service
cannot understand how this is so, although this is a process recommended in
the Bhagavad-gétä and in other Vedic literatures.

TEXT  9

AQa icta& SaMaaDaaTau& Na Xa¥-aeiz MaiYa iSQarMa( )

A>YaaSaYaaeGaeNa TaTaae MaaiMaC^aáu& DaNaÅYa )) 9 ))

atha cittaà samädhätuà
na çaknoñi mayi sthiram
abhyäsa-yogena tato
mäm icchäptuà dhanaïjaya

SYNONYMS

atha—if, therefore; cittam—mind; samädhätum—to fix; na—not;
çaknoñi—you are able; mayi—upon Me; sthiram—steadily; abhyäsa-yogena—by
the practice of devotional service; tataù—then; mäm—Me; icchä—desire;
äptum—to get; dhanam-jaya—O winner of wealth, Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me
without deviation, then follow the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga. In this
way develop a desire to attain Me.

PURPORT

In this verse, two different processes of bhakti-yoga are indicated. The first

applies  to  one  who  has  actually  developed  an  attachment  for  Kåñëa,  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by transcendental love. And the other is for
one  who  has  not  developed  an  attachment  for  the  Supreme  Person  by
transcendental  love.  For  this  second  class there are different prescribed rules
and  regulations  one  can  follow  to  be  ultimately  elevated  to  the  stage  of
attachment to Kåñëa.

Bhakti-yoga  is  the  purification  of  the  senses.  At  the  present  moment  in
material  existence  the  senses  are  always  impure,  being  engaged  in  sense
gratification.  But  by  the  practice  of  bhakti-yoga  these  senses  can  become
purified,  and  in  the  purified  state  they  come  directly  in  contact  with  the
Supreme Lord. In this material existence, I may be engaged in some service to
some master, but I don’t really lovingly serve my master. I simply serve to get
some money. And the master also is not in love; he takes service from me and
pays  me.  So  there  is  no  question  of  love.  But  for  spiritual  life,  one  must  be
elevated  to  the  pure  stage  of  love.  That  stage  of  love  can  be  achieved  by
practice of devotional service, performed with the present senses.

This love of God is now in a dormant state in everyone’s heart. And, there,
love of God is manifested in different ways, but it is contaminated by material
association. Now the heart has to be purified of the material association, and
that  dormant,  natural  love  for  Kåñëa  has  to  be  revived.  That  is  the  whole
process.

To  practice  the  regulative  principles  of  bhakti-yoga  one  should,  under  the
guidance  of  an  expert  spiritual  master,  follow  certain  principles:  one  should
rise  early  in  the  morning,  take  bath,  enter  the  temple  and  offer  prayers  and
chant Hare Kåñëa, then collect flowers to offer to the Deity, cook foodstuffs to
offer  to  the  Deity,  take  prasädam,  and  so  on.  There  are  various  rules  and
regulations  which  one  should  follow.  And  one  should  constantly  hear
Bhagavad-gétä  and  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  from  pure  devotees.  This  practice  can
help anyone rise to the level of love of God, and then he is sure of his progress
into the spiritual kingdom of God. This practice of bhakti-yoga, under the rules
and regulations, with the direction of a spiritual master, will surely bring one
to the stage of love of God.

TEXT  10

A>YaaSae_PYaSaMaQaaeR_iSa MaTk-MaRParMaae >av )

MadQaRMaiPa k-MaaRi<a ku-vRiNSaiÖMavaPSYaiSa )) 10 ))

abhyäse ’py asamartho ’si
mat-karma-paramo bhava
mad-artham api karmäëi
kurvan siddhim aväpsyasi

SYNONYMS

abhyäse—in practice; api—even if; asamarthaù—unable; asi—you are;
mat-karma—My work; paramaù—dedicated to; bhava—become;
mat-artham—for My sake; api—even; karmäëi—work; kurvan—performing;
siddhim—perfection; aväpsyasi—you will achieve.

TRANSLATION

If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to work

for Me, because by working for Me you will come to the perfect stage.

PURPORT

One  who  is  not  able  even  to  practice  the  regulative  principles  of
bhakti-yoga, under the guidance of a spiritual master, can still be drawn to this
perfectional stage by working for the Supreme Lord. How to do this work has
already  been  explained  in  the  fifty-fifth  verse  of  the  Eleventh  Chapter.  One
should  be  sympathetic  to  the  propagation  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  There  are
many  devotees  who  are  engaged  in  the  propagation  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,
and they require help. So, even if one cannot directly practice the regulative
principles  of  bhakti-yoga,  he  can  try  to  help  such  work.  Every  endeavor
requires land, capital, organization and labor. Just as in business one requires a
place to stay, some capital to use, some labor and some organization to expand,

so the same is required in the service of Kåñëa. The only difference is that in
materialism one works for sense gratification. The same work, however, can be
performed for the satisfaction of Kåñëa, and that is spiritual activity. If one has
sufficient money, he can help in building an office or temple for propagating
Kåñëa  consciousness.  Or  he  can  help  with  publications.  There  are  various
fields of activity, and one should be interested in such activities. If one cannot
sacrifice  the  results  of  his  activities,  the  same  person  can  still  sacrifice  some
percentage  to  propagate  Kåñëa  consciousness.  This  voluntary  service  to  the
cause of Kåñëa consciousness will help one to rise to a higher state of love for
God, whereupon one becomes perfect.

TEXT  11

AQaETadPYaXa¢-ae_iSa k-Tau| MaÛaeGaMaaié[Ta" )

SavRk-MaRf-l/TYaaGa& TaTa" ku-å YaTaaTMavaNa( )) 11 ))

athaitad apy açakto ’si
kartuà mad-yogam äçritaù
sarva-karma-phala-tyägaà
tataù kuru yatätmavän

SYNONYMS

atha—even though; etat—this; api—also; açaktaù—unable; asi—you are;
kartum—to perform; mat—unto Me; yogam—in devotional service;
äçritaù—taking refuge; sarva-karma—of all activities; phala—of the results;
tyägam—renunciation; tataù—then; kuru—do; yata-ätma-vän—self-situated.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness of Me, then try to

act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.

PURPORT

It may be that one is unable even to sympathize with the activities of Kåñëa
consciousness because of social, familial or religious considerations or because
of some other impediments. If one attaches himself directly to the activities of
Kåñëa consciousness, there may be objections from family members, or so many
other  difficulties.  For  one  who  has  such  a  problem,  it  is  advised  that  he
sacrifice  the  accumulated  result  of  his  activities  to  some  good  cause.  Such
procedures  are  described  in  the  Vedic  rules.  There  are  many  descriptions  of
sacrifices and special functions of puëya, or special work in which the result of
one’s previous action may be applied. Thus one may gradually become elevated
to  the  state  of  knowledge.  It  is  also  found  that  when  one  who  is  not  even
interested  in  the  activities  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  gives  charity  to  some
hospital or some other social institution, he gives up the hard-earned results of
his activities. That is also recommended here because by the practice of giving
up the fruits of one’s activities one is sure to purify his mind gradually, and in
that  purified  stage  of  mind  one  becomes  able  to  understand  Kåñëa
consciousness.  Of  course  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  not  dependent  on  any  other
experience,  because  Kåñëa  consciousness  itself  can  purify  one’s  mind,  but  if
there are impediments to accepting Kåñëa consciousness, one may try to give
up the results of his actions. In that respect, social service, community service,
national service, sacrifice for one’s country, etc., may be accepted so that some
day one may come to the stage of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord.
In Bhagavad-gétä  (18.46)  we  find  it  is  stated,  yataù  pravåttir  bhütänäm:  if  one
decides to sacrifice for the supreme cause, even if he does not know that the
supreme cause is Kåñëa, he will come gradually to understand that Kåñëa is the
supreme cause by the sacrificial method.

TEXT  12

é[eYaae ih jaNaMa>YaaSaaJjaNaaÖyaNa& iviXaZYaTae )

DYaaNaaTk-MaRf-l/TYaaGaSTYaaGaaC^aiNTarNaNTarMa( )) 12 ))

çreyo hi jïänam abhyäsäj
jïänäd dhyänaà viçiñyate

dhyänät karma-phala-tyägas
tyägäc chäntir anantaram

SYNONYMS

çreyaù—better; hi—certainly; jïänam—knowledge; abhyäsät—than practice;
jïänät—than knowledge; dhyänam—meditation; viçiñyate—is considered
better; dhyänät—than meditation; karma-phala-tyägaù—renunciation of the
results of fruitive action; tyägät—by such renunciation; çäntiù—peace;
anantaram—thereafter.

TRANSLATION

If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the cultivation of

knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, is meditation, and better than
meditation is renunciation of the fruits of action, for by such renunciation one
can attain peace of mind.

PURPORT

As  mentioned  in  the  previous  verses,  there  are  two  kinds  of  devotional
service: the way of regulative principles and the way of full attachment in love
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those who are actually not able to
follow the principles of Kåñëa consciousness it is better to cultivate knowledge,
because  by  knowledge  one  can  be  able  to  understand  his  real  position.
Gradually  knowledge  will  develop  to  the  point  of  meditation.  By  meditation
one  can  be  able  to  understand  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  by  a
gradual  process.  There  are  processes  which  make  one  understand  that  one
himself is the Supreme, and that sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable
to  engage  in  devotional  service.  If  one is  not  able  to  meditate  in  such  a  way,
then  there  are  prescribed  duties,  as  enjoined  in  the  Vedic  literature,  for  the
brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras, which we shall find in the last chapter
of  Bhagavad-gétä.  But  in  all  cases,  one  should  give  up  the  result  or  fruits  of
labor; this means to employ the result of karma for some good cause.

In  summary,  to  reach  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the  highest
goal, there are two processes: one process is by gradual development, and the
other process is direct. Devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness is the direct
method,  and  the  other  method  involves  renouncing  the  fruits  of  one’s
activities. Then one can come to the stage of knowledge, then to the stage of
meditation, then to the stage of understanding the Supersoul, and then to the
stage  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  One  may  take  either  the
step-by-step  process  or  the  direct  path.  The  direct  process  is  not  possible  for
everyone;  therefore  the  indirect  process  is  also  good.  It  is,  however,  to  be
understood that the indirect process is not recommended for Arjuna, because
he is already at the stage of loving devotional service to the Supreme Lord. It is
for  others,  who  are  not  at  this  stage;  for  them  the  gradual  process  of
renunciation,  knowledge,  meditation  and  realization  of  the  Supersoul  and
Brahman should be followed. But as far as Bhagavad-gétä is concerned, it is the
direct method that is stressed. Everyone is advised to take to the direct method
and surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.

TEXTS

 13–14

AÜeía SavR>aUTaaNaa& MaE}a" k-å<a Wv c )

iNaMaRMaae iNarhªar" SaMadu"%Sau%" +aMaq )) 13 ))

SaNTauí" SaTaTa& YaaeGaq YaTaaTMaa d*!iNaêYa" )

MaYYaiPaRTaMaNaaebuiÖYaaeR MaÙ¢-" Sa Mae iPa[Ya" )) 14 ))

adveñöä sarva-bhütänäà
maitraù karuëa eva ca
nirmamo nirahaìkäraù
sama-duùkha-sukhaù kñamé

santuñöaù satataà yogé
yatätmä dåòha-niçcayaù
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir

yo mad-bhaktaù sa me priyaù

SYNONYMS

adveñöä—nonenvious; sarva-bhütänäm—toward all living entities;
maitraù—friendly; karuëaù—kindly; eva—certainly; ca—also;
nirmamaù—with no sense of proprietorship; nirahaìkäraù—without false ego;
sama—equal; duùkha—in distress; sukhaù—and happiness; kñamé—forgiving;
santuñöaù—satisfied; satatam—always; yogé—one engaged in devotion;
yata-ätmä—self-controlled; dåòha-niçcayaù—with determination; mayi—upon
Me; arpita—engaged; manaù—mind; buddhiù—and intelligence; yaù—one
who; mat-bhaktaù—My devotee; saù—he; me—to Me; priyaù—dear.

TRANSLATION

One who is not envious but is a kind friend to all living entities, who does
not think himself a proprietor and is free from false ego, who is equal in both
happiness and distress, who is tolerant, always satisfied, self-controlled, and
engaged in devotional service with determination, his mind and intelligence
fixed on Me—such a devotee of Mine is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

Coming again to the point of pure devotional service, the Lord is describing
the transcendental qualifications of a pure devotee in these two verses. A pure
devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances. Nor is he envious of anyone.
Nor  does  a  devotee  become  his  enemy’s  enemy;  he  thinks,  “This  person  is
acting as my enemy due to my own past misdeeds. So it is better to suffer than
to  protest.”  In  the Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (10.14.8)  it  is  stated:  tat  te  ’nukampäà
susamékñamäëo  bhuïjäna  evätma-kåtaà  vipäkam.  Whenever  a  devotee  is  in
distress or has fallen into difficulty, he thinks that it is the Lord’s mercy upon
him.  He  thinks,  “Thanks  to  my  past  misdeeds  I  should  suffer  far,  far  greater
than I am suffering now. So it is by the mercy of the Supreme Lord that I am
not getting all the punishment I am due. I am just getting a little, by the mercy

of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.”  Therefore  he  is  always  calm,  quiet
and patient, despite many distressful conditions. A devotee is also always kind
to  everyone,  even  to  his  enemy.  Nirmama  means  that  a  devotee  does  not
attach  much  importance  to  the  pains  and  trouble  pertaining  to  the  body
because he knows perfectly well that he is not the material body. He does not
identify with the body; therefore he is freed from the conception of false ego
and is equipoised in happiness and distress. He is tolerant, and he is satisfied
with whatever comes by the grace of the Supreme Lord. He does not endeavor
much to achieve something with great difficulty; therefore he is always joyful.
He  is  a  completely  perfect  mystic  because  he  is  fixed  in  the  instructions
received from the spiritual master, and because his senses are controlled he is
determined. He is not swayed by false arguments, because no one can lead him
from the fixed determination of devotional service. He is fully conscious that
Kåñëa is the eternal Lord, so no one can disturb him. All these qualifications
enable  him  to  fix  his  mind  and  intelligence  entirely  on  the  Supreme  Lord.
Such a standard of devotional service is undoubtedly very rare, but a devotee
becomes  situated  in  that  stage  by  following  the  regulative  principles  of
devotional service. Furthermore, the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear
to  Him,  for  the  Lord  is  always  pleased  with  all  his  activities  in  full  Kåñëa
consciousness.

TEXT  15

YaSMaaàaeiÜJaTae l/aek-ae l/aek-aàaeiÜJaTae c Ya" )

hzaRMazR>aYaaeÜeGaEMauR¢-ae Ya" Sa c Mae iPa[Ya" )) 15 ))

yasmän nodvijate loko
lokän nodvijate ca yaù
harñämarña-bhayodvegair
mukto yaù sa ca me priyaù

SYNONYMS

yasmät—from whom; na—never; udvijate—are agitated; lokaù—people;
lokät—from people; na—never; udvijate—is disturbed; ca—also; yaù—anyone
who; harña—from happiness; amarña—distress; bhaya—fear; udvegaiù—and
anxiety; muktaù—freed; yaù—who; saù—anyone; ca—also; me—to Me;
priyaù—very dear.

TRANSLATION

He for whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by
anyone, who is equipoised in happiness and distress, fear and anxiety, is very
dear to Me.

PURPORT

A  few  of  a  devotee’s  qualifications  are  further  being  described.  No  one  is
put  into  difficulty,  anxiety,  fearfulness  or  dissatisfaction  by  such  a  devotee.
Since  a  devotee  is  kind  to  everyone,  he  does  not  act  in  such  a  way  as  to  put
others  into  anxiety.  At  the  same  time,  if  others  try  to  put  a  devotee  into
anxiety, he is not disturbed. It is by the grace of the Lord that he is so practiced
that  he  is  not  disturbed  by  any  outward  disturbance.  Actually  because  a
devotee is always engrossed in Kåñëa consciousness and engaged in devotional
service,  such  material  circumstances  cannot  move  him.  Generally  a
materialistic person becomes very happy when there is something for his sense
gratification  and  his  body,  but  when  he  sees  that  others  have  something  for
their  sense  gratification  and  he  hasn’t,  he  is  sorry  and  envious.  When  he  is
expecting some retaliation from an enemy, he is in a state of fear, and when he
cannot successfully execute something he becomes dejected. A devotee who is
always transcendental to all these disturbances is very dear to Kåñëa.

TEXT  16

ANaPae+a" éuicdR+a odaSaqNaae GaTaVYaQa" )

SavaRrM>aPairTYaaGaq Yaae MaÙ¢-" Sa Mae iPa[Ya" )) 16 ))

anapekñaù çucir dakña
udäséno gata-vyathaù
sarvärambha-parityägé
yo mad-bhaktaù sa me priyaù

SYNONYMS

anapekñaù—neutral; çuciù—pure; dakñaù—expert; udäsénaù—free from care;
gata-vyathaù—freed from all distress; sarva-ärambha—of all endeavors;
parityägé—renouncer; yaù—anyone who; mat-bhaktaù—My devotee; saù—he;
me—to Me; priyaù—very dear.

TRANSLATION

My devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of activities, who is
pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains, and not striving for some result,
is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

Money may be offered to a devotee, but he should not struggle to acquire it.
If automatically, by the grace of the Supreme, money comes to him, he is not
agitated. Naturally a devotee takes a bath at least twice in a day and rises early
in the morning for devotional service. Thus he is naturally clean both inwardly
and outwardly. A devotee is always expert because he fully knows the essence
of  all  activities  of  life  and  he  is  convinced  of  the  authoritative  scriptures.  A
devotee never takes the part of a particular party; therefore he is carefree. He
is  never  pained,  because  he  is  free  from  all  designations;  he  knows  that  his
body  is  a  designation,  so  if  there  are  some  bodily  pains,  he  is  free.  The  pure
devotee  does  not  endeavor  for  anything  which  is  against  the  principles  of
devotional  service.  For  example,  constructing  a  big  building  requires  great
energy, and a devotee does not take to such business if it does not benefit him
by advancing his devotional service. He may construct a temple for the Lord,
and for that he may take all kinds of anxiety, but he does not construct a big

house for his personal relations.

TEXT  17

Yaae Na ôZYaiTa Na Üeií Na XaaeciTa Na k-ax(+aiTa )

éu>aaéu>aPairTYaaGaq >ai¢-MaaNYa" Sa Mae iPa[Ya" )) 17 ))

yo na håñyati na dveñöi
na çocati na käìkñati
çubhäçubha-parityägé
bhaktimän yaù sa me priyaù

SYNONYMS

yaù—one who; na—never; håñyati—takes pleasure; na—never;
dveñöi—grieves; na—never; çocati—laments; na—never; käìkñati—desires;
çubha—of the auspicious; açubha—and the inauspicious; parityägé—renouncer;
bhakti-män—devotee; yaù—one who; saù—he is; me—to Me; priyaù—dear.

TRANSLATION

One who neither rejoices nor grieves, who neither laments nor desires, and
who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things—such a devotee is very
dear to Me.

PURPORT

A pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and loss,
nor is he very much anxious to get a son or disciple, nor is he distressed by not
getting  them.  If  he  loses  anything  which  is  very  dear  to  him,  he  does  not
lament. Similarly, if he does not get what he desires, he is not distressed. He is
transcendental  in  the  face  of  all  kinds  of  auspicious,  inauspicious  and  sinful
activities. He is prepared to accept all kinds of risks for the satisfaction of the
Supreme  Lord.  Nothing  is  an  impediment  in  the  discharge  of  his  devotional

service. Such a devotee is very dear to Kåñëa.

TEXTS  18–19

SaMa" Xa}aaE c iMa}ae c TaQaa MaaNaaPaMaaNaYaae" )

XaqTaaeZ<aSau%du"%ezu SaMa" Sa®ivviJaRTa" )) 18 ))

TauLYaiNaNdaSTauiTaMaaŒNaq SaNTauíae YaeNa ke-NaicTa( )

AiNake-Ta" iSQarMaiTa>aRi¢-MaaNMae iPa[Yaae Nar" )) 19 ))

samaù çatrau ca mitre ca
tathä mänäpamänayoù
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkheñu
samaù saìga-vivarjitaù

tulya-nindä-stutir mauné
santuñöo yena kenacit
aniketaù sthira-matir
bhaktimän me priyo naraù

SYNONYMS

samaù—equal; çatrau—to an enemy; ca—also; mitre—to a friend; ca—also;
tathä—so; mäna—in honor; apamänayoù—and dishonor; çéta—in cold;
uñëa—heat; sukha—happiness; duùkheñu—and distress; samaù—equipoised;
saìga-vivarjitaù—free from all association; tulya—equal; nindä—in
defamation; stutiù—and repute; mauné—silent; santuñöaù—satisfied; yena
kenacit—with anything; aniketaù—having no residence; sthira—fixed;
matiù—determination; bhakti-män—engaged in devotion; me—to Me;
priyaù—dear; naraù—a man.

TRANSLATION

One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and
dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame and infamy, who is always

free from contaminating association, always silent and satisfied with anything,
who doesn’t care for any residence, who is fixed in knowledge and who is
engaged in devotional service—such a person is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is praised
and  sometimes  one  is  defamed;  that  is  the  nature  of  human  society.  But  a
devotee  is  always  transcendental  to  artificial  fame  and  infamy,  distress  or
happiness.  He  is  very  patient.  He  does  not  speak  of  anything  but  the  topics
about Kåñëa; therefore he is called silent. Silent does not mean that one should
not speak; silent means that one should not speak nonsense. One should speak
only of essentials, and the most essential speech for the devotee is to speak for
the sake of the Supreme Lord. A devotee is happy in all conditions; sometimes
he  may  get  very  palatable  foodstuffs,  sometimes  not,  but  he  is  satisfied.  Nor
does he care for any residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a
tree, and he may sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted to
neither.  He  is  called  fixed  because  he  is  fixed  in  his  determination  and
knowledge.  We  may  find  some  repetition  in  the  descriptions  of  the
qualifications of a devotee, but this is just to emphasize the fact that a devotee
must acquire all these qualifications. Without good qualifications, one cannot
be  a  pure  devotee.  Haräv  abhaktasya  kuto  mahad-guëäù:  one  who  is  not  a
devotee  has  no  good  qualification.  One  who  wants  to  be  recognized  as  a
devotee  should  develop  the  good  qualifications.  Of  course  he  does  not
extraneously  endeavor  to  acquire  these  qualifications,  but  engagement  in
Kåñëa  consciousness  and  devotional  service  automatically  helps  him  develop
them.

TEXT  20

Yae Tau DaMaaRMa*TaiMad& YaQaae¢&- PaYauRPaaSaTae )

é[ÕDaaNaa MaTParMaa >a¢-aSTae_Taqv Mae iPa[Yaa" )) 20 ))

ye tu dharmämåtam idaà
yathoktaà paryupäsate
çraddadhänä mat-paramä
bhaktäs te ’téva me priyäù

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; tu—but; dharma—of religion; amåtam—nectar; idam—this;
yathä—as; uktam—said; paryupäsate—completely engage;
çraddadhänäù—with faith; mat-paramäù—taking Me, the Supreme Lord, as
everything; bhaktäù—devotees; te—they; atéva—very, very; me—to Me;
priyäù—dear.

TRANSLATION

Those who follow this imperishable path of devotional service and who

completely engage themselves with faith, making Me the supreme goal, are very,
very dear to Me.

PURPORT

In this chapter, from verse 2 through the end—from mayy äveçya mano ye
mäm  (“fixing  the  mind  on  Me”)  through  ye  tu  dharmämåtam  idam  (“this
religion  of  eternal  engagement”)—the  Supreme  Lord  has  explained  the
processes  of  transcendental  service  for  approaching  Him.  Such  processes  are
very dear to the Lord, and He accepts a person engaged in them. The question
of  who  is  better—one  who  is  engaged  in  the  path  of  impersonal  Brahman  or
one  who  is  engaged  in  the  personal  service  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead—was raised by Arjuna, and the Lord replied to him so explicitly that
there is no doubt that devotional service to the Personality of Godhead is the
best of all processes of spiritual realization. In other words, in this chapter it is
decided  that  through  good  association  one  develops  attachment  for  pure
devotional  service  and  thereby  accepts  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master  and  from
him  begins  to  hear  and  chant  and  observe  the  regulative  principles  of

devotional  service  with  faith,  attachment  and  devotion  and  thus  becomes
engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord. This path is recommended
in this chapter; therefore there is no doubt that devotional service is the only
absolute  path  for  self-realization,  for  the  attainment  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The impersonal conception of the Supreme Absolute
Truth,  as  described  in  this  chapter,  is  recommended  only  up  to  the  time  one
surrenders himself for self-realization. In other words, as long as one does not
have the chance to associate with a pure devotee, the impersonal conception
may  be  beneficial.  In  the  impersonal  conception  of  the  Absolute  Truth  one
works  without  fruitive  result,  meditates  and  cultivates  knowledge  to
understand  spirit  and  matter.  This  is  necessary  as  long  as  one  is  not  in  the
association of a pure devotee. Fortunately, if one develops directly a desire to
engage in Kåñëa consciousness in pure devotional service, he does not need to
undergo step-by-step improvements in spiritual realization. Devotional service,
as  described  in  the  middle  six  chapters  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  is  more  congenial.
One need not bother about materials to keep body and soul together, because
by the grace of the Lord everything is carried out automatically.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Twelfth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Devotional Service.

- CHAPTER 13 -
Nature, the Enjoyer, and Consciousness

TEXTS  1–2

AJauRNa ovac

Pa[k*-iTa& Pauåz& cEv +ae}a& +ae}ajMaev c )

WTaÜeidTauiMaC^aiMa jaNa& jeYa& c ke-Xav )) 1 ))

é[q>aGavaNauvacwd& Xarqr& k-aENTaeYa +ae}aiMaTYai>aDaqYaTae )

WTaÛae veita Ta& Pa[ahu" +ae}aj wiTa TaiÜd" )) 2 ))

arjuna uväca
prakåtià puruñaà caiva
kñetraà kñetra-jïam eva ca
etad veditum icchämi
jïänaà jïeyaà ca keçava

çré-bhagavän uväca
idaà çaréraà kaunteya
kñetram ity abhidhéyate
etad yo vetti taà prähuù
kñetra-jïa iti tad-vidaù

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; prakåtim—nature; puruñam—the enjoyer;
ca—also; eva—certainly; kñetram—the field; kñetra-jïam—the knower of the
field; eva—certainly; ca—also; etat—all this; veditum—to understand;
icchämi—I wish; jïänam—knowledge; jïeyam—the object of knowledge;
ca—also; keçava—O Kåñëa; çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead
said; idam—this; çaréram—body; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; kñetram—the
field; iti—thus; abhidhéyate—is called; etat—this; yaù—one who; vetti—knows;
tam—he; prähuù—is called; kñetra-jïaù—the knower of the field; iti—thus;
tat-vidaù—by those who know this.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O my dear Kåñëa, I wish to know about prakåti [nature],

puruña [the enjoyer], and the field and the knower of the field, and of
knowledge and the object of knowledge.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: This body, O son of Kunté, is called
the field, and one who knows this body is called the knower of the field.

PURPORT

Arjuna  was  inquisitive  about  prakåti  (nature),  puruña  (the  enjoyer),  kñetra
(the  field),  kñetra-jïa  (its  knower),  and  knowledge  and  the  object  of
knowledge.  When  he  inquired  about  all  these,  Kåñëa  said  that  this  body  is
called the field and that one who knows this body is called the knower of the
field.  This  body  is  the  field  of  activity  for  the  conditioned  soul.  The
conditioned soul is entrapped in material existence, and he attempts to lord it
over  material  nature.  And  so,  according  to  his  capacity  to  dominate  material
nature, he gets a field of activity. That field of activity is the body. And what is
the  body?  The  body  is  made  of  senses.  The  conditioned  soul  wants  to  enjoy
sense gratification, and, according to his capacity to enjoy sense gratification,
he is offered a body, or field of activity. Therefore the body is called kñetra, or
the field of activity for the conditioned soul. Now, the person, who should not
identify himself with the body, is called kñetra-jïa, the knower of the field. It is
not  very  difficult  to  understand  the  difference  between  the  field  and  its
knower, the body and the knower of the body. Any person can consider that
from  childhood  to  old  age  he  undergoes  so  many  changes  of  body  and  yet  is
still one person, remaining. Thus there is a difference between the knower of
the  field  of  activities  and  the  actual  field  of  activities.  A  living  conditioned
soul can thus understand that he is different from the body. It is described in
the  beginning—dehino  ’smin—that  the  living  entity  is  within  the  body  and
that  the  body  is  changing  from  childhood  to  boyhood  and  from  boyhood  to
youth  and  from  youth  to  old  age,  and  the  person  who  owns  the  body  knows
that  the  body  is  changing.  The  owner  is  distinctly  kñetra-jïa.  Sometimes  we
think, “I am happy,” “I am a man,” “I am a woman,” “I am a dog,” “I am a cat.”
These are the bodily designations of the knower. But the knower is different
from  the  body.  Although  we  may  use  many  articles—our  clothes,  etc.—we
know that we are different from the things used. Similarly, we also understand
by  a  little  contemplation  that  we  are  different  from  the  body.  I  or  you  or

anyone else who owns the body is called kñetra-jïa, the knower of the field of
activities, and the body is called kñetra, the field of activities itself.

In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gétä the knower of the body (the living
entity)  and  the  position  by  which  he  can  understand  the  Supreme  Lord  are
described.  In  the  middle  six  chapters  of  the  Bhagavad-gétä  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the relationship between the individual soul and
the  Supersoul  in  regard  to  devotional  service  are  described.  The  superior
position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the subordinate position
of  the  individual  soul  are  definitely  defined  in  these  chapters.  The  living
entities are subordinate under all circumstances, but in their forgetfulness they
are  suffering.  When  enlightened  by  pious  activities,  they  approach  the
Supreme  Lord  in  different  capacities—as  the  distressed,  those  in  want  of
money,  the  inquisitive,  and  those  in  search  of  knowledge.  That  is  also
described.  Now,  starting  with  the  Thirteenth  Chapter,  how  the  living  entity
comes  into  contact  with  material  nature  and  how  he  is  delivered  by  the
Supreme Lord through the different methods of fruitive activities, cultivation
of knowledge, and the discharge of devotional service are explained. Although
the  living  entity  is  completely  different  from  the  material  body,  he  somehow
becomes related. This also is explained.

TEXT  3

+ae}aj& caiPa Maa& iviÖ SavR+ae}aezu >aarTa )

+ae}a+ae}ajYaaejaRNa& YataJjaNa& MaTa& MaMa )) 3 ))

kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi
sarva-kñetreñu bhärata
kñetra-kñetrajïayor jïänaà
yat taj jïänaà mataà mama

SYNONYMS

kñetra-jïam—the knower of the field; ca—also; api—certainly; mäm—Me;

viddhi—know; sarva—all; kñetreñu—in bodily fields; bhärata—O son of
Bharata; kñetra—the field of activities (the body); kñetra-jïayoù—and the
knower of the field; jïänam—knowledge of; yat—that which; tat—that;
jïänam—knowledge; matam—opinion; mama—My.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all
bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is called knowledge. That is
My opinion.

PURPORT

While  discussing  the  subject  of  the  body  and  the  knower  of  the  body,  the
soul and the Supersoul, we shall find three different topics of study: the Lord,
the living entity, and matter. In every field of activities, in every body, there
are two souls: the individual soul and the Supersoul. Because the Supersoul is
the  plenary  expansion  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa
says, “I am also the knower, but I am not the individual knower of the body. I
am  the  superknower.  I  am  present  in  every  body  as  the  Paramätmä,  or
Supersoul.”

One who studies the subject matter of the field of activity and the knower
of  the  field  very  minutely,  in  terms  of  this  Bhagavad-gétä,  can  attain  to
knowledge.

The Lord says, “I am the knower of the field of activities in every individual
body.”  The  individual  may  be  the  knower  of  his  own  body,  but  he  is  not  in
knowledge  of  other  bodies.  The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is
present  as  the  Supersoul  in  all  bodies,  knows  everything  about  all  bodies.  He
knows all the different bodies of all the various species of life. A citizen may
know  everything  about  his  patch  of  land,  but  the  king  knows  not  only  his
palace but all the properties possessed by the individual citizens. Similarly, one
may  be  the  proprietor  of  the  body  individually,  but  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the
proprietor of all bodies. The king is the original proprietor of the kingdom, and
the  citizen  is  the  secondary  proprietor.  Similarly,  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the

supreme proprietor of all bodies.

The  body  consists  of  the  senses.  The  Supreme  Lord  is  Håñékeça,  Which
means “the controller of the senses.” He is the original controller of the senses,
just  as  the  king  is  the  original  controller  of  all  the  activities  of  the  state;  the
citizens are secondary controllers. The Lord says, “I am also the knower.” This
means  that  He  is  the  superknower;  the  individual  soul  knows  only  his
particular body. In the Vedic literature, it is stated as follows:

kñeträëi hi çaréräëi
béjaà cäpi çubhäçubhe
täni vetti sa yogätmä
tataù kñetra-jïa ucyate

This  body  is  called  the  kñetra,  and  within  it  dwells  the  owner  of  the  body
and the Supreme Lord, who knows both the body and the owner of the body.
Therefore  He  is  called  the  knower  of  all  fields.  The  distinction  between  the
field  of  activities,  the  knower  of  activities,  and  the  supreme  knower  of
activities is described as follows. Perfect knowledge of the constitution of the
body,  the  constitution  of  the  individual  soul,  and  the  constitution  of  the
Supersoul is known in terms of Vedic literature as jïäna. That is the opinion of
Kåñëa.  To  understand  both  the  soul  and  the  Supersoul  as  one  yet  distinct  is
knowledge. One who does not understand the field of activity and the knower
of activity is not in perfect knowledge. One has to understand the position of
prakåti  (nature),  puruña  (the  enjoyer  of  nature)  and  éçvara  (the  knower  who
dominates or controls nature and the individual soul). One should not confuse
the three in their different capacities. One should not confuse the painter, the
painting and the easel. This material world, which is the field of activities, is
nature, and the enjoyer of nature is the living entity, and above them both is
the  supreme  controller,  the  Personality  of  Godhead.  It  is  stated  in  the  Vedic
language  (in  the  Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad  1.12),  bhoktä  bhogyaà  preritäraà  ca
matvä/  sarvaà  proktaà  tri  vidham-brahmam  etat.  There  are  three  Brahman
conceptions:  prakåti  is  Brahman  as  the  field  of  activities,  and  the  jéva
(individual soul) is also Brahman and is trying to control material nature, and
the controller of both of them is also Brahman, but He is the factual controller.

In this chapter it will also be explained that out of the two knowers, one is
fallible and the other is infallible. One is superior and the other is subordinate.
One  who  understands  the  two  knowers  of  the  field  to  be  one  and  the  same
contradicts the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who states here very clearly,
“I am also the knower of the field of activity.” One who misunderstands a rope
to  be  a  serpent  is  not  in  knowledge.  There  are  different  kinds  of  bodies,  and
there are different owners of the bodies. Because each individual soul has his
individual  capacity  for  lording  it  over  material  nature,  there  are  different
bodies. But the Supreme also is present in them as the controller. The word ca
is significant, for it indicates the total number of bodies. That is the opinion of
Çréla Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa. Kåñëa is the Supersoul present in each and every
body  apart  from  the  individual  soul.  And  Kåñëa  explicitly  says  here  that  the
Supersoul is the controller of both the field of activities and the finite enjoyer.

TEXT  4

TaT+ae}a& YaÀ Yaad*Kc YaiÜk-air YaTaê YaTa( )

Sa c Yaae YaTPa[>aavê TaTSaMaaSaeNa Mae é*<au )) 4 ))

tat kñetraà yac ca yädåk ca
yad-vikäri yataç ca yat
sa ca yo yat-prabhävaç ca
tat samäsena me çåëu

SYNONYMS

tat—that; kñetram—field of activities; yat—what; ca—also; yädåk—as it is;
ca—also; yat—having what; vikäri—changes; yataù—from which; ca—also;
yat—what; saù—he; ca—also; yaù—who; yat—having what;
prabhävaù—influence; ca—also; tat—that; samäsena—in summary; me—from
Me; çåëu—understand.

TRANSLATION

Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how it is
constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, who that knower of
the field of activities is, and what his influences are.

PURPORT

The Lord is describing the field of activities and the knower of the field of
activities in their constitutional positions. One has to know how this body is
constituted, the materials of which this body is made, under whose control this
body is working, how the changes are taking place, wherefrom the changes are
coming,  what  the  causes  are,  what  the  reasons  are,  what  the  ultimate  goal  of
the individual soul is, and what the actual form of the individual soul is. One
should  also  know  the  distinction  between  the  individual  living  soul  and  the
Supersoul,  their  different  influences,  their  potentials,  etc.  One  just  has  to
understand  this  Bhagavad-gétä  directly  from  the  description  given  by  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and all this will be clarified. But one should
be careful not to consider the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every body
to be one with the individual soul, the jéva. This is something like equating the
potent and the impotent.

TEXT  5

‰izi>abRhuDaa GaqTa& ^Ndaei>aivRivDaE" Pa*Qak(- )

b]øSaU}aPadEêEv heTauMaiÙivRiNaiêTaE" )) 5 ))

åñibhir bahudhä gétaà
chandobhir vividhaiù påthak
brahma-sütra-padaiç caiva
hetumadbhir viniçcitaiù

SYNONYMS

åñibhiù—by the wise sages; bahudhä—in many ways; gétam—described;

chandobhiù—by Vedic hymns; vividhaiù—various; påthak—variously;
brahma-sütra—of the Vedänta; padaiù—by the aphorisms; ca—also;
eva—certainly; hetu-madbhiù—with cause and effect; viniçcitaiù—certain.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of activities is
described by various sages in various Vedic writings. It is especially presented in
Vedänta-sütra with all reasoning as to cause and effect.

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  is  the  highest  authority  in
explaining  this  knowledge.  Still,  as  a  matter  of  course,  learned  scholars  and
standard  authorities  always  give  evidence  from  previous  authorities.  Kåñëa  is
explaining this most controversial point regarding the duality and nonduality
of the soul and the Supersoul by referring to a scripture, the Vedänta, which is
accepted as authority. First He says, “This is according to different sages.” As
far as the sages are concerned, besides Himself, Vyäsadeva (the author of the
Vedänta-sütra)  is  a  great  sage,  and  in  the  Vedänta-sütra  duality  is  perfectly
explained. And Vyäsadeva’s father, Paräçara, is also a great sage, and he writes
in his books of religiosity, aham tvaà ca tathänye. .. “we—you, I and the various
other living entities—are all transcendental, although in material bodies. Now
we are fallen into the ways of the three modes of material nature according to
our  different  karma. As such, some are on higher levels, and some are in the
lower  nature.  The  higher  and  lower  natures  exist  due  to  ignorance  and  are
being  manifested  in  an  infinite  number  of  living  entities.  But  the  Supersoul,
which  is  infallible,  is  uncontaminated  by  the  three  qualities  of  nature  and  is
transcendental.”  Similarly,  in  the  original  Vedas,  a  distinction  between  the
soul,  the  Supersoul  and  the  body  is  made,  especially  in  the  Kaöha  Upaniñad.
There  are  many  great  sages  who  have  explained  this,  and  Paräçara  is
considered principal among them.

The word chandobhiù refers to the various Vedic literatures. The Taittiréya
Upaniñad, for example, which is a branch of the Yajur Veda, describes nature,

the living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

As stated before, kñetra is the field of activities, and there are two kinds of
kñetra-jïa: the individual living entity and the supreme living entity. As stated
in  the  Taittiréya Upaniñad  (2.9),  brahma  pucchaà  pratiñöhä.  There  is  a
manifestation of the Supreme Lord’s energy known as anna-maya, dependence
upon  food  for  existence.  This  is  a  materialistic  realization  of  the  Supreme.
Then, in präëa-maya, after realizing the Supreme Absolute Truth in food, one
can  realize  the  Absolute  Truth  in  the  living  symptoms  or  life  forms.  In
jïäna-maya,  realization  extends  beyond  the  living  symptoms  to  the  point  of
thinking,  feeling  and  willing.  Then  there  is  Brahman  realization,  called
vijïäna-maya,  in  which  the  living  entity’s  mind  and  life  symptoms  are
distinguished  from  the  living  entity  himself.  The  next  and  supreme  stage  is
änanda-maya, realization of the all-blissful nature. Thus there are five stages of
Brahman realization, which are called brahma puccham. Out of these, the first
three—anna-maya,  präëa-maya  and 
jïäna-maya—involve  the  fields  of
activities of the living entities. Transcendental to all these fields of activities is
the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is  called  änanda-maya.  The  Vedänta-sütra  also
describes  the  Supreme  by  saying,  änanda-mayo 
’bhyäsät:  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  is  by  nature  full  of  joy.  To  enjoy  His  transcendental
bliss, He expands into vijïäna-maya, präëa-maya, jïäna-maya and anna-maya.
In the field of activities the living entity is considered to be the enjoyer, and
different  from  him  is  the  änanda-maya.  That  means  that  if  the  living  entity
decides  to  enjoy  in  dovetailing  himself  with  the  änanda-maya,  then  he
becomes perfect. This is the real picture of the Supreme Lord as the supreme
knower  of  the  field,  the  living  entity  as  the  subordinate  knower,  and  the
nature  of  the  field  of  activities.  One  has  to  search  for  this  truth  in  the
Vedänta-sütra, or Brahma-sütra.

It  is  mentioned  here  that  the  codes  of  the  Brahma-sütra  are  very  nicely
arranged according to cause and effect. Some of the sütras, or aphorisms, are
na viyad açruteù  (2.3.2),  nätmä çruteù  (2.3.18),  and  parät tu tac-chruteù
(2.3.40).  The  first  aphorism  indicates  the  field  of  activities,  the  second
indicates  the  living  entity,  and  the  third  indicates  the  Supreme  Lord,  the
summum bonum among all the manifestations of various entities.

TEXTS

 6–7

Maha>aUTaaNYahªarae buiÖrVYa¢-Maev c )

wiNd]Yaai<a dXaEk&- c PaÄ ceiNd]YaGaaecra" )) 6 ))

wC^a Üez" Sau%& du"%& SaºaTaêeTaNaa Da*iTa" )

WTaT+ae}a& SaMaaSaeNa Saivk-arMaudaôTaMa( )) 7 ))

mahä-bhütäny ahaìkäro
buddhir avyaktam eva ca
indriyäëi daçaikaà ca
païca cendriya-gocaräù

icchä dveñaù sukhaà duùkhaà
saìghätaç cetanä dhåtiù
etat kñetraà samäsena
sa-vikäram udähåtam

SYNONYMS

mahä-bhütäni—the great elements; ahaìkäraù—false ego;
buddhiù—intelligence; avyaktam—the unmanifested; eva—certainly; ca—also;
indriyäëi—the senses; daça-ekam—eleven; ca—also; païca—five; ca—also;
indriya-go-caräù—the objects of the senses; icchä—desire; dveñaù—hatred;
sukham—happiness; duùkham—distress; saìghätaù—the aggregate;
cetanä—living symptoms; dhåtiù—conviction; etat—all this; kñetram—the
field of activities; samäsena—in summary; sa-vikäram—with interactions;
udähåtam—exemplified.

TRANSLATION

The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the ten
senses and the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred, happiness, distress,
the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions—all these are considered, in

summary, to be the field of activities and its interactions.

PURPORT

From  all  the  authoritative  statements  of  the  great  sages,  the  Vedic  hymns
and the aphorisms of the Vedänta-sütra, the components of this world can be
understood as follows. First there are earth, water, fire, air and ether. These are
the  five  great  elements  (mahä-bhüta).  Then  there  are  false  ego,  intelligence
and the unmanifested stage of the three modes of nature. Then there are five
senses  for  acquiring  knowledge:  the  eyes,  ears,  nose,  tongue  and  skin.  Then
five  working  senses:  voice,  legs,  hands,  anus  and  genitals.  Then,  above  the
senses,  there  is  the  mind,  which  is  within  and  which  can  be  called  the  sense
within.  Therefore,  including  the  mind,  there  are  eleven  senses  altogether.
Then  there  are  the  five  objects  of  the  senses:  smell,  taste,  form,  touch  and
sound. Now the aggregate of these twenty-four elements is called the field of
activity. If one makes an analytical study of these twenty-four subjects, then he
can  very  well  understand  the  field  of  activity.  Then  there  are  desire,  hatred,
happiness and distress, which are interactions, representations of the five great
elements in the gross body. The living symptoms, represented by consciousness
and  conviction,  are  the  manifestation  of  the  subtle  body—mind,  ego  and
intelligence. These subtle elements are included within the field of activities.

The five great elements are a gross representation of the false ego, which in
turn represents the primal stage of false ego technically called the materialistic
conception,  or  tämasa-buddhi,  intelligence  in  ignorance.  This,  further,
represents the unmanifested stage of the three modes of material nature. The
unmanifested modes of material nature are called pradhäna.

One  who  desires  to  know  the  twenty-four  elements  in  detail  along  with
their interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. In Bhagavad-gétä,
a summary only is given.

The body is the representation of all these factors, and there are changes of
the  body,  which  are  six  in  number:  the  body  is  born,  it  grows,  it  stays,  it
produces by-products, then it begins to decay, and at the last stage it vanishes.
Therefore the field is a nonpermanent material thing. However, the kñetra-jïa,

the knower of the field, its proprietor, is different.

TEXTS  8–12

AMaaiNaTvMadiM>aTvMaih&Saa +aaiNTaraJaRvMa( )

AacaYaaeRPaaSaNa& XaaEc& SQaEYaRMaaTMaiviNaGa]h" )) 8 ))

wiNd]YaaQaeRzu vEraGYaMaNahªar Wv c )

JaNMaMa*TYauJaraVYaaiDadu"%daezaNaudXaRNaMa( )) 9 ))

ASai¢-rNai>aZv®" Pau}adarGa*haidzu )

iNaTYa& c SaMaictaTviMaíaiNaíaePaPaitazu )) 10 ))

MaiYa caNaNYaYaaeGaeNa >ai¢-rVYai>acair<aq )

iviv¢-deXaSaeivTvMariTaJaRNaSa&Said )) 11 ))

ADYaaTMajaNaiNaTYaTv& TatvjaNaaQaRdXaRNaMa( )

WTaJjaNaiMaiTa Pa[ae¢-MajaNa& YadTaae_NYaQaa )) 12 ))

(8)
amänitvam adambhitvam
ahiàsä kñäntir ärjavam
äcäryopäsanaà çaucaà
sthairyam ätma-vinigrahaù

(9)
indriyärtheñu vairägyam
anahaìkära eva ca
janma-måtyu-jarä-vyädhi-
duùkha-doñänudarçanam

(10)
asaktir anabhiñvaìgaù
putra-dära-gåhädiñu
nityaà ca sama-cittatvam
iñöäniñöopapattiñu

(11)
mayi cänanya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicäriëé
vivikta-deça-sevitvam
aratir jana-saàsadi

(12)
adhyätma-jïäna-nityatvaà
tattva-jïänärtha-darçanam
etaj jïänam iti proktam
ajïänaà yad ato ’nyathä

SYNONYMS

amänitvam—humility; adambhitvam—pridelessness; ahiàsä—nonviolence;
kñäntiù—tolerance; ärjavam—simplicity; äcärya-upäsanam—approaching a
bona fide spiritual master; çaucam—cleanliness; sthairyam—steadfastness;
ätma-vinigrahaù—self-control; indriya-artheñu—in the matter of the senses;
vairägyam—renunciation; anahaìkäraù—being without false egoism;
eva—certainly; ca—also; janma—of birth; måtyu—death; jarä—old age;
vyädhi—and disease; duùkha—of the distress; doña—the fault;
anudarçanam—observing; asaktiù—being without attachment;
anabhiñvaìgaù—being without association; putra—for son; dära—wife;
gåha-ädiñu—home, etc.; nityam—constant; ca—also;
sama-cittatvam—equilibrium; iñöa—the desirable; aniñöa—and undesirable;
upapattiñu—having obtained; mayi—unto Me; ca—also; ananya-yogena—by
unalloyed devotional service; bhaktiù—devotion; avyabhicäriëé—without any
break; vivikta—to solitary; deça—places; sevitvam—aspiring; aratiù—being
without attachment; jana-saàsadi—to people in general;
adhyätma—pertaining to the self; jïäna—in knowledge;
nityatvam—constancy; tattva-jïäna—of knowledge of the truth; artha—for
the object; darçanam—philosophy; etat—all this; jïänam—knowledge;
iti—thus; proktam—declared; ajïänam—ignorance; yat—that which;
ataù—from this; anyathä—other.

TRANSLATION

Humility; pridelessness; nonviolence; tolerance; simplicity; approaching a
bona fide spiritual master; cleanliness; steadiness; self-control; renunciation of
the objects of sense gratification; absence of false ego; the perception of the evil
of birth, death, old age and disease; detachment; freedom from entanglement
with children, wife, home and the rest; even-mindedness amid pleasant and
unpleasant events; constant and unalloyed devotion to Me; aspiring to live in a
solitary place; detachment from the general mass of people; accepting the
importance of self-realization; and philosophical search for the Absolute
Truth—all these I declare to be knowledge, and besides this whatever there
may be is ignorance.

PURPORT

This  process  of  knowledge  is  sometimes  misunderstood  by  less  intelligent
men as being the interaction of the field of activity. But actually this is the real
process  of  knowledge.  If  one  accepts  this  process,  then  the  possibility  of
approaching  the  Absolute  Truth  exists.  This  is  not  the  interaction  of  the
twenty-four elements, as described before. This is actually the means to get out
of the entanglement of those elements. The embodied soul is entrapped by the
body, which is a casing made of the twenty-four elements, and the process of
knowledge  as  described  here  is  the  means  to  get  out  of  it.  Of  all  the
descriptions of the process of knowledge, the most important point is described
in  the  first  line  of  the  eleventh  verse.  Mayi  cänanya-yogena  bhaktir
avyabhicäriëé:  the  process  of  knowledge  terminates  in  unalloyed  devotional
service to the Lord. So if one does not approach, or is not able to approach, the
transcendental  service  of  the  Lord,  then  the  other  nineteen  items  are  of  no
particular  value.  But  if  one  takes  to  devotional  service  in  full  Kåñëa
consciousness, the other nineteen items automatically develop within him. As
stated  in  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (5.18.12),  yasyästi  bhaktir  bhagavaty  akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù. All the good qualities of knowledge develop
in  one  who  has  attained  the  stage  of  devotional  service.  The  principle  of

accepting  a  spiritual  master,  as  mentioned  in  the  eighth  verse,  is  essential.
Even  for  one  who  takes  to  devotional  service,  it  is  most  important.
Transcendental life begins when one accepts a bona fide spiritual master. The
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa,  clearly  states  here  that  this
process  of  knowledge  is  the  actual  path.  Anything  speculated  beyond  this  is
nonsense.

As for the knowledge outlined here, the items may be analyzed as follows.
Humility  means  that  one  should  not  be  anxious  to  have  the  satisfaction  of
being honored by others. The material conception of life makes us very eager
to receive honor from others, but from the point of view of a man in perfect
knowledge—who  knows  that  he  is  not  this  body—anything,  honor  or
dishonor, pertaining to this body is useless. One should not be hankering after
this material deception. People are very anxious to be famous for their religion,
and  consequently  sometimes  it  is  found  that  without  understanding  the
principles  of  religion  one  enters  into  some  group  which  is  not  actually
following religious principles and then wants to advertise himself as a religious
mentor. As for actual advancement in spiritual science, one should have a test
to see how far he is progressing. He can judge by these items.

Nonviolence is generally taken to mean not killing or destroying the body,
but  actually  nonviolence  means  not  to  put  others  into  distress.  People  in
general  are  trapped  by  ignorance  in  the  material  concept  of  life,  and  they
perpetually  suffer  material  pains.  So  unless  one  elevates  people  to  spiritual
knowledge, one is practicing violence. One should try his best to distribute real
knowledge to the people, so that they may become enlightened and leave this
material entanglement. That is nonviolence.

Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult and dishonor
from  others.  If  one  is  engaged  in  the  advancement  of  spiritual  knowledge,
there will be so many insults and much dishonor from others. This is expected
because material nature is so constituted. Even a boy like Prahläda, who, only
five  years  old,  was  engaged  in  the  cultivation  of  spiritual  knowledge,  was
endangered  when  his  father  became  antagonistic  to  his  devotion.  The  father
tried to kill him in so many ways, but Prahläda tolerated him. So there may be
many  impediments  to  making  advancement  in  spiritual  knowledge,  but  we

should be tolerant and continue our progress with determination.

Simplicity means that without diplomacy one should be so straightforward
that he can disclose the real truth even to an enemy. As for acceptance of the
spiritual  master,  that  is  essential,  because  without  the  instruction  of  a  bona
fide spiritual master one cannot progress in the spiritual science. One should
approach  the  spiritual  master  with  all  humility  and  offer  him  all  services  so
that  he  will  be  pleased  to  bestow  his  blessings  upon  the  disciple.  Because  a
bona  fide  spiritual  master  is  a  representative  of  Kåñëa,  if  he  bestows  any
blessings  upon  his  disciple,  that  will  make  the  disciple  immediately  advanced
without  the  disciple’s  following  the  regulative  principles.  Or,  the  regulative
principles  will  be  easier  for  one  who  has  served  the  spiritual  master  without
reservation.

Cleanliness is essential for making advancement in spiritual life. There are
two  kinds  of  cleanliness:  external  and  internal.  External  cleanliness  means
taking a bath, but for internal cleanliness one has to think of Kåñëa always and
chant  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare
Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare  Hare.  This  process  cleans  the  accumulated  dust  of
past karma from the mind.

Steadiness means that one should be very determined to make progress in
spiritual life. Without such determination, one cannot make tangible progress.
And  self-control  means  that  one  should  not  accept  anything  which  is
detrimental  to  the  path  of  spiritual progress. One should become accustomed
to this and reject anything which is against the path of spiritual progress. This
is real renunciation. The senses are so strong that they are always anxious to
have sense gratification. One should not cater to these demands, which are not
necessary. The senses should only be gratified to keep the body fit so that one
can discharge his duty in advancing in spiritual life. The most important and
uncontrollable sense is the tongue. If one can control the tongue, then there is
every possibility of controlling the other senses. The function of the tongue is
to taste and to vibrate. Therefore, by systematic regulation, the tongue should
always be engaged in tasting the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Kåñëa and
chanting  Hare  Kåñëa.  As  far  as  the  eyes  are  concerned,  they  should  not  be
allowed to see anything but the beautiful form of Kåñëa. That will control the

eyes.  Similarly,  the  ears  should  be  engaged  in  hearing  about  Kåñëa  and  the
nose in smelling the flowers offered to Kåñëa. This is the process of devotional
service, and it is understood here that Bhagavad-gétä is simply expounding the
science  of  devotional  service.  Devotional  service  is  the  main  and  sole
objective. Unintelligent commentators on the Bhagavad-gétä try to divert the
mind  of  the  reader  to  other  subjects,  but  there  is  no  other  subject  in
Bhagavad-gétä than devotional service.

False ego means accepting this body as oneself. When one understands that
he is not his body and is spirit soul, he comes to his real ego. Ego is there. False
ego  is  condemned,  but  not  real  ego.  In  the  Vedic  literature  (Båhad-äraëyaka
Upaniñad 1.4.10) it is said, ahaà brahmäsmi: I am Brahman, I am spirit. This “I
am,” the sense of self, also exists in the liberated stage of self-realization. This
sense of “I am” is ego, but when the sense of “I am” is applied to this false body
it  is  false  ego.  When  the  sense  of  self  is  applied  to  reality,  that  is  real  ego.
There are some philosophers who say we should give up our ego, but we cannot
give  up  our  ego,  because  ego  means  identity.  We  ought,  of  course,  to  give  up
the false identification with the body.

One should try to understand the distress of accepting birth, death, old age
and disease. There are descriptions in various Vedic literatures of birth. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  the  world  of  the  unborn,  the  child’s  stay  in  the  womb  of
the  mother,  its  suffering,  etc.,  are  all  very  graphically  described.  It  should  be
thoroughly  understood  that  birth  is  distressful.  Because  we  forget  how  much
distress we have suffered within the womb of the mother, we do not make any
solution  to  the  repetition  of  birth  and  death.  Similarly  at  the  time  of  death
there  are  all  kinds  of  sufferings,  and  they  are  also  mentioned  in  the
authoritative  scriptures.  These  should  be discussed. And as far as disease and
old age are concerned, everyone gets practical experience. No one wants to be
diseased,  and  no  one  wants  to  become  old,  but  there  is  no  avoiding  these.
Unless  we  have  a  pessimistic  view  of  this  material  life,  considering  the
distresses  of  birth,  death,  old  age  and  disease,  there  is  no  impetus  for  our
making advancement in spiritual life.

As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant that one
should  have  no  feeling  for  these.  They  are  natural  objects  of  affection.  But

like  Bhagavad-gétä 

some  discussion  on  books 

when  they  are  not  favorable  to  spiritual  progress,  then  one  should  not  be
attached  to  them.  The  best  process  for  making  the  home  pleasant  is  Kåñëa
consciousness. If one is in full Kåñëa consciousness, he can make his home very
happy, because this process of Kåñëa consciousness is very easy. One need only
chant  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare
Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare  Hare,  accept  the  remnants  of  foodstuffs  offered  to
Kåñëa,  have 
and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  and  engage  oneself  in  Deity  worship.  These  four  things
will make one happy. One should train the members of his family in this way.
The  family  members  can  sit  down  morning  and  evening  and  chant  together
Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,
Räma Räma, Hare Hare. If one can mold his family life in this way to develop
Kåñëa consciousness, following these four principles, then there is no need to
change  from  family  life  to  renounced  life.  But  if  it  is  not  congenial,  not
favorable  for  spiritual  advancement,  then  family  life  should  be  abandoned.
One  must  sacrifice  everything  to  realize  or  serve  Kåñëa,  just  as  Arjuna  did.
Arjuna did not want to kill his family members, but when he understood that
these family members were impediments to his Kåñëa realization, he accepted
the instruction of Kåñëa and fought and killed them. In all cases, one should be
detached from the happiness and distress of family life, because in this world
one can never be fully happy or fully miserable.

Happiness and distress are concomitant factors of material life. One should
learn  to  tolerate,  as  advised  in  Bhagavad-gétä.  One  can  never  restrict  the
coming  and  going  of  happiness  and  distress,  so  one  should  be  detached  from
the  materialistic  way  of  life  and  be  automatically  equipoised  in  both  cases.
Generally, when we get something desirable we are very happy, and when we
get  something  undesirable  we  are  distressed.  But  if  we  are  actually  in  the
spiritual position these things will not agitate us. To reach that stage, we have
to  practice  unbreakable  devotional  service.  Devotional  service  to  Kåñëa
without deviation means engaging oneself in the nine processes of devotional
service—chanting, hearing, worshiping, offering respect, etc.—as described in
the last verse of the Ninth Chapter. That process should be followed.

Naturally, when one is adapted to the spiritual way of life, he will not want

to mix with materialistic men. That would go against his grain. One may test
himself  by  seeing  how  far  he  is  inclined  to  live  in  a  solitary  place,  without
unwanted  association.  Naturally  a  devotee  has  no  taste  for  unnecessary
sporting  or  cinema-going  or  enjoying  some  social  function,  because  he
understands  that  these  are  simply  a  waste  of  time.  There  are  many  research
scholars  and  philosophers  who  study  sex  life  or  some  other  subject,  but
according  to  Bhagavad-gétä  such  research  work  and  philosophical  speculation
have  no  value.  That  is  more  or  less  nonsensical.  According  to  Bhagavad-gétä,
one should make research, by philosophical discretion, into the nature of the
soul. One should make research to understand the self. That is recommended
here.

As  far  as  self-realization  is  concerned,  it  is  clearly  stated  here  that
bhakti-yoga  is  especially  practical.  As  soon  as  there  is  a  question  of  devotion,
one must consider the relationship between the Supersoul and the individual
soul. The individual soul and the Supersoul cannot be one, at least not in the
bhakti  conception,  the  devotional  conception  of  life.  This  service  of  the
individual soul to the Supreme Soul is eternal, nityam, as it is clearly stated. So
bhakti,  or  devotional  service,  is  eternal.  One  should  be  established  in  that
philosophical conviction.

In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11) this is explained. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam. “Those who are actually knowers of the Absolute
Truth  know  that  the  Self  is  realized  in  three  different  phases,  as  Brahman,
Paramätmä and Bhagavän.” Bhagavän is the last word in the realization of the
Absolute  Truth;  therefore  one  should  reach  up  to  that  platform  of
understanding  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  thus  engage  in  the
devotional service of the Lord. That is the perfection of knowledge.

Beginning  from  practicing  humility  up  to  the  point  of  realization  of  the
Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, this process is just like a
staircase beginning from the ground floor and going up to the top floor. Now
on this staircase there are so many people who have reached the first floor, the
second  or  the  third  floor,  etc.,  but  unless  one  reaches  the  top  floor,  which  is
the  understanding  of  Kåñëa,  he  is  at  a  lower  stage  of  knowledge.  If  anyone
wants  to  compete  with  God  and  at  the  same  time  make  advancement  in

spiritual  knowledge,  he  will  be  frustrated.  It  is  clearly  stated  that  without
humility,  understanding  is  not  truly  possible.  To  think  oneself  God  is  most
puffed  up.  Although  the  living  entity  is always being kicked by the stringent
laws of material nature, he still thinks, “I am God” because of ignorance. The
beginning  of  knowledge,  therefore,  is  amänitva,  humility.  One  should  be
humble and know that he is subordinate to the Supreme Lord. Due to rebellion
against  the  Supreme  Lord,  one  becomes  subordinate  to  material  nature.  One
must know and be convinced of this truth.

TEXT  13

jeYa& YataTPa[v+YaaiMa YaJjaTvaMa*TaMaénuTae )

ANaaidMaTPar& b]ø Na SataàaSaduCYaTae )) 13 ))

jïeyaà yat tat pravakñyämi
yaj jïätvämåtam açnute
anädi mat-paraà brahma
na sat tan näsad ucyate

SYNONYMS

jïeyam—the knowable; yat—which; tat—that; pravakñyämi—I shall now
explain; yat—which; jïätvä—knowing; amåtam—nectar; açnute—one tastes;
anädi—beginningless; mat-param—subordinate to Me; brahma—spirit;
na—neither; sat—cause; tat—that; na—nor; asat—effect; ucyate—is said to
be.

TRANSLATION

I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the eternal.
Brahman, the spirit, beginningless and subordinate to Me, lies beyond the cause
and effect of this material world.

PURPORT

The Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the field.
He  has  also  explained  the  process  of  knowing  the  knower  of  the  field  of
activities. Now He begins to explain the knowable, first the soul and then the
Supersoul. By knowledge of the knower, both the soul and the Supersoul, one
can  relish  the  nectar  of  life.  As  explained  in  the  Second  Chapter,  the  living
entity is eternal. This is also confirmed here. There is no specific date at which
the  jéva  was  born.  Nor  can  anyone  trace  out  the  history  of  the  jévätmä’s
manifestation  from  the  Supreme  Lord.  Therefore  it  is  beginningless.  The
Vedic  literature  confirms  this:  na  jäyate  mriyate  vä  vipaçcit  (Kaöha Upaniñad
1.2.18). The knower of the body is never born and never dies, and he is full of
knowledge.

The  Supreme  Lord  as  the  Supersoul  is  also  stated  in  the  Vedic  literature
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.16) to be pradhäna-kñetrajïa-patir guëeçaù, the chief
knower of the body and the master of the three modes of material nature. In
the  småti  it  is  said,  däsa-bhüto  harer  eva  nänyasvaiva  kadäcana.  The  living
entities  are  eternally  in  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  This  is  also
confirmed  by  Lord  Caitanya  in  His  teachings.  Therefore  the  description  of
Brahman  mentioned  in  this  verse  is  in  relation  to  the  individual  soul,  and
when the word Brahman is applied to the living entity, it is to be understood
that he is vijïäna-brahma as opposed to änanda-brahma. Änanda-brahma is the
Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  14

SavRTa" Paai<aPaad& TaTSavRTaae_i+aiXaraeMau%Ma( )

SavRTa" é[uiTaMaçaeke- SavRMaav*TYa iTaïiTa )) 14 ))

sarvataù päëi-pädaà tat
sarvato ’kñi-çiro-mukham
sarvataù çrutimal loke
sarvam ävåtya tiñöhati

SYNONYMS

sarvataù—everywhere; päëi—hands; pädam—legs; tat—that;
sarvataù—everywhere; akñi—eyes; çiraù—heads; mukham—faces;
sarvataù—everywhere; çruti-mat—having ears; loke—in the world;
sarvam—everything; ävåtya—covering; tiñöhati—exists.

TRANSLATION

Everywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes, heads and faces, and He has

ears everywhere. In this way the Supersoul exists, pervading everything.

PURPORT

As  the  sun  exists  diffusing  its  unlimited  rays,  so  does  the  Supersoul,  or
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He exists in His all-pervading form, and in
Him  exist  all  the  individual  living  entities,  beginning  from  the  first  great
teacher,  Brahmä,  down  to  the  small  ants.  There  are  unlimited  heads,  legs,
hands  and  eyes,  and  unlimited  living  entities.  All  are  existing  in  and  on  the
Supersoul.  Therefore  the  Supersoul  is  all-pervading.  The  individual  soul,
however, cannot say that he has his hands, legs and eyes everywhere. That is
not  possible.  If  he  thinks  that  under  ignorance  he  is  not  conscious  that  his
hands and legs are diffused all over but when he attains to proper knowledge
he will come to that stage, his thinking is contradictory. This means that the
individual soul, having become conditioned by material nature, is not supreme.
The  Supreme  is  different  from  the  individual  soul.  The  Supreme  Lord  can
extend  His  hand  without  limit;  the  individual  soul  cannot.  In  Bhagavad-gétä
the Lord says that if anyone offers Him a flower, or a fruit, or a little water, He
accepts it. If the Lord is a far distance away, how can He accept things? This is
the  omnipotence  of  the  Lord:  even  though  He  is  situated  in  His  own  abode,
far,  far  away  from  earth,  He  can  extend  His  hand  to  accept  what  anyone
offers. That is His potency. In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.37) it is stated, goloka eva
nivasaty  akhilätma-bhütaù:  although  He  is  always  engaged  in  pastimes  in  His

transcendental  planet,  He  is  all-pervading.  The  individual  soul  cannot  claim
that he is all-pervading. Therefore this verse describes the Supreme Soul, the
Personality of Godhead, not the individual soul.

TEXT  15

SaveRiNd]YaGau<aa>aaSa& SaveRiNd]YaivviJaRTaMa( )

ASa¢&- SavR>a*ÀEv iNaGauR<a& Gau<a>aae¢*- c )) 15 ))

sarvendriya-guëäbhäsaà
sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktaà sarva-bhåc caiva
nirguëaà guëa-bhoktå ca

SYNONYMS

sarva—of all; indriya—senses; guëa—of the qualities; äbhäsam—the original
source; sarva—all; indriya—senses; vivarjitam—being without;
asaktam—without attachment; sarva-bhåt—the maintainer of everyone;
ca—also; eva—certainly; nirguëam—without material qualities;
guëa-bhoktå—master of the guëas; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without senses.

He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living beings. He
transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is the master of all the
modes of material nature.

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Lord,  although  the  source  of  all  the  senses  of  the  living
entities,  doesn’t  have  material  senses  like  they  have.  Actually,  the  individual
souls  have  spiritual  senses,  but  in  conditioned  life  they  are  covered  with  the

transcendental 

material  elements,  and  therefore  the  sense  activities  are  exhibited  through
matter.  The  Supreme  Lord’s  senses  are  not  so  covered.  His  senses  are
transcendental  and  are  therefore  called  nirguëa.  Guëa  means  the  material
modes,  but  His  senses  are  without  material  covering.  It  should  be understood
that His senses are not exactly like ours. Although He is the source of all our
senses,  which  are
sensory  activities,  He  has  His 
uncontaminated.  This  is  very  nicely  explained  in  the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad
(3.19)  in  the  verse  apäëi-pädo  javano  grahétä.  The  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead  has  no  hands  which  are  materially  contaminated,  but  He  has  His
hands and accepts whatever sacrifice is offered to Him. That is the distinction
between the conditioned soul and the Supersoul. He has no material eyes, but
He has eyes—otherwise how could He see? He sees everything—past, present
and future. He lives within the heart of the living being, and He knows what
we have done in the past, what we are doing now, and what is awaiting us in
the future. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä: He knows everything, but
no one knows Him. It is said that the Supreme Lord has no legs like us, but He
can travel throughout space because He has spiritual legs. In other words, the
Lord is not impersonal; He has His eyes, legs, hands and everything else, and
because we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord we also have these things.
But His hands, legs, eyes and senses are not contaminated by material nature.

Bhagavad-gétä also confirms that when the Lord appears He appears as He is
by  His  internal  potency.  He  is  not  contaminated  by  the  material  energy,
because He is the Lord of material energy. In the Vedic literature we find that
His  whole  embodiment  is  spiritual.  He  has  His  eternal  form,  called
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. He is full of all opulence. He is the proprietor
of all wealth and the owner of all energy. He is the most intelligent and is full
of knowledge. These are some of the symptoms of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.  He  is  the  maintainer  of  all  living  entities  and  the  witness  of  all
activity. As far as we can understand from Vedic literature, the Supreme Lord
is always transcendental. Although we do not see His head, face, hands or legs,
He has them, and when we are elevated to the transcendental situation we can
see the Lord’s form. Due to materially contaminated senses, we cannot see His
form.  Therefore  the  impersonalists,  who  are  still  materially  affected,  cannot

understand the Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  16

bihrNTaê >aUTaaNaaMacr& crMaev c )

SaU+MaTvatadivjeYa& dUrSQa& caiNTake- c TaTa( )) 16 ))

bahir antaç ca bhütänäm
acaraà caram eva ca
sükñmatvät tad avijïeyaà
düra-sthaà cäntike ca tat

SYNONYMS

bahiù—outside; antaù—inside; ca—also; bhütänäm—of all living entities;
acaram—not moving; caram—moving; eva—also; ca—and; sükñmatvät—on
account of being subtle; tat—that; avijïeyam—unknowable; düra-stham—far
away; ca—also; antike—near; ca—and; tat—that.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Truth exists outside and inside of all living beings, the moving

and the nonmoving. Because He is subtle, He is beyond the power of the
material senses to see or to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all.

PURPORT

In  Vedic  literature  we  understand  that  Näräyaëa,  the  Supreme  Person,  is
residing  both  outside  and  inside  of  every  living  entity.  He  is  present  in  both
the spiritual and material worlds. Although He is far, far away, still He is near
to us. These are the statements of Vedic literature. Äséno düraà vrajati çayäno
yäti  sarvataù  (Kaöha Upaniñad  1.2.21).  And  because  He  is  always  engaged  in
transcendental  bliss,  we  cannot  understand  how  He  is  enjoying  His  full
opulence. We cannot see or understand with these material senses. Therefore

in the Vedic language it is said that to understand Him our material mind and
senses cannot act. But one who has purified his mind and senses by practicing
Kåñëa  consciousness  in  devotional  service  can  see  Him  constantly.  It  is
confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä that the devotee who has developed love for the
Supreme  God  can  see  Him  always,  without  cessation.  And  it  is  confirmed  in
Bhagavad-gétä (11.54) that He can be seen and understood only by devotional
service. Bhaktyä tv ananyayä çakyaù.

TEXT  17

Aiv>a¢&- c >aUTaezu iv>a¢-iMav c iSQaTaMa( )

>aUTa>aTa*R c TaJjeYa& Ga]iSaZ<au Pa[>aivZ<au c )) 17 ))

avibhaktaà ca bhüteñu
vibhaktam iva ca sthitam
bhüta-bhartå ca taj jïeyaà
grasiñëu prabhaviñëu ca

SYNONYMS

avibhaktam—without division; ca—also; bhüteñu—in all living beings;
vibhaktam—divided; iva—as if; ca—also; sthitam—situated; bhüta-bhartå—the
maintainer of all living entities; ca—also; tat—that; jïeyam—to be
understood; grasiñëu—devouring; prabhaviñëu—developing; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

Although the Supersoul appears to be divided among all beings, He is never

divided. He is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every living
entity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.

PURPORT

The  Lord  is  situated  in  everyone’s  heart  as  the  Supersoul.  Does  this  mean

that He has become divided? No. Actually, He is one. The example is given of
the sun: The sun, at the meridian, is situated in its place. But if one goes for
five  thousand  miles  in  all  directions  and  asks,  “Where  is  the  sun?”  everyone
will  say  that  it  is  shining  on  his  head. In the Vedic literature this example is
given to show that although He is undivided, He is situated as if divided. Also
it  is  said  in  Vedic  literature  that  one  Viñëu  is  present  everywhere  by  His
omnipotence, just as the sun appears in many places to many persons. And the
Supreme  Lord,  although  the  maintainer  of  every  living  entity,  devours
everything  at  the  time  of  annihilation.  This  was  confirmed  in  the  Eleventh
Chapter  when  the  Lord  said  that  He  had  come  to  devour  all  the  warriors
assembled  at  Kurukñetra.  He  also  mentioned  that  in  the  form  of  time  He
devours also. He is the annihilator, the killer of all. When there is creation, He
develops  all  from  their  original  state,  and  at  the  time  of  annihilation  He
devours them. The Vedic hymns confirm the fact that He is the origin of all
living  entities  and  the  rest  of  all.  After  creation,  everything  rests  in  His
omnipotence, and after annihilation everything again returns to rest in Him.
These  are  the  confirmations  of  Vedic  hymns.  Yato  vä  imäni  bhütäni  jäyante
yena  jätäni  jévanti  yat  prayanty  abhisaà-viçanti  tad  brahma  tad  vijijïäsasva
(Taittiréya Upaniñad 3.1).

TEXT  18

JYaaeiTazaMaiPa TaJJYaaeiTaSTaMaSa" ParMauCYaTae )

jaNa& jeYa& jaNaGaMYa& ôid SavRSYa iviïTaMa( )) 18 ))

jyotiñäm api taj jyotis
tamasaù param ucyate
jïänaà jïeyaà jïäna-gamyaà
hådi sarvasya viñöhitam

SYNONYMS

jyotiñäm—in all luminous objects; api—also; tat—that; jyotiù—the source of

light; tamasaù—the darkness; param—beyond; ucyate—is said;
jïänam—knowledge; jïeyam—to be known; jïäna-gamyam—to be approached
by knowledge; hådi—in the heart; sarvasya—of everyone; viñöhitam—situated.

TRANSLATION

He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the darkness
of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the object of knowledge,
and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in everyone’s heart.

PURPORT

The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the source of light
in all luminous objects like the sun, moon and stars. In the Vedic literature we
find that in the spiritual kingdom there is no need of sun or moon, because the
effulgence  of  the  Supreme  Lord  is  there.  In  the  material  world  that
brahmajyoti, the Lord’s spiritual effulgence, is covered by the mahat-tattva, the
material elements; therefore in this material world we require the assistance of
sun, moon, electricity, etc., for light. But in the spiritual world there is no need
of  such  things.  It  is  clearly  stated  in  the  Vedic  literature  that  because  of  His
luminous  effulgence,  everything  is  illuminated.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  His
situation  is  not  in  the  material  world.  He  is  situated  in  the  spiritual  world,
which is far, far away in the spiritual sky. That is also confirmed in the Vedic
literature.  Äditya-varëaà  tamasaù  parastät  (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad  3.8).  He  is
just like the sun, eternally luminous, but He is far, far beyond the darkness of
this material world.

His  knowledge  is  transcendental.  The  Vedic  literature  confirms  that
Brahman is concentrated transcendental knowledge. To one who is anxious to
be transferred to that spiritual world, knowledge is given by the Supreme Lord,
who is situated in everyone’s heart. One Vedic mantra (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad
6.18)  says,  taà  ha  devam  ätma-buddhi-prakäçaà  mumukñur  vai  çaraëam  ahaà
prapadye. One must surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he
at all wants liberation. As far as the goal of ultimate knowledge is concerned, it
is  also  confirmed  in  Vedic  literature:  tam  eva  viditväti  måtyum  eti.  “Only  by

knowing Him can one surpass the boundary of birth and death.” (Çvetäçvatara
Upaniñad 3.8)

He is situated in everyone’s heart as the supreme controller. The Supreme
has  legs  and  hands  distributed  everywhere,  and  this  cannot  be  said  of  the
individual  soul.  Therefore  that  there  are  two  knowers  of  the  field  of
activity—the  individual  soul  and  the  Supersoul—must  be  admitted.  One’s
hands  and  legs  are  distributed  locally,  but  Kåñëa’s  hands  and  legs  are
distributed everywhere. This is confirmed in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (3.17):
sarvasya prabhum éçänaà sarvasya çaraëaà båhat. That Supreme Personality of
Godhead,  Supersoul,  is  the  prabhu,  or  master,  of  all  living  entities;  therefore
He is the ultimate shelter of all living entities. So there is no denying the fact
that the Supreme Supersoul and the individual soul are always different.

TEXT  19

wiTa +ae}a& TaQaa jaNa& jeYa& cae¢&- SaMaaSaTa" )

MaÙ¢- WTaiÜjaYa MaÙavaYaaePaPaÛTae )) 19 ))

iti kñetraà tathä jïänaà
jïeyaà coktaà samäsataù
mad-bhakta etad vijïäya
mad-bhäväyopapadyate

SYNONYMS

iti—thus; kñetram—the field of activities (the body); tathä—also;
jïänam—knowledge; jïeyam—the knowable; ca—also; uktam—described;
samäsataù—in summary; mat-bhaktaù—My devotee; etat—all this;
vijïäya—after understanding; mat-bhäväya—to My nature;
upapadyate—attains.

TRANSLATION

Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable have

been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understand this
thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.

PURPORT

The Lord has described in summary the body, knowledge and the knowable.
This knowledge is of three things: the knower, the knowable and the process of
knowing.  Combined,  these  are  called  vijïäna,  or  the  science  of  knowledge.
Perfect  knowledge  can  be  understood  by  the  unalloyed  devotees  of  the  Lord
directly. Others are unable to understand. The monists say that at the ultimate
stage  these  three  items  become  one,  but  the  devotees  do  not  accept  this.
Knowledge  and  development  of  knowledge  mean  understanding  oneself  in
Kåñëa consciousness. We are being led by material consciousness, but as soon
as  we  transfer  all  consciousness  to  Kåñëa’s  activities  and  realize  that  Kåñëa  is
everything,  then  we  attain  real  knowledge.  In  other  words,  knowledge  is
nothing  but  the  preliminary  stage  of  understanding  devotional  service
perfectly. In the Fifteenth Chapter this will be very clearly explained.

Now,  to  summarize,  one  may  understand  that  verses  6  and  7,  beginning
from mahä-bhütäni and continuing through cetanä dhåtiù, analyze the material
elements and certain manifestations of the symptoms of life. These combine to
form  the  body,  or  the  field  of  activities.  And  verses  8  through  12,  from
tattva-jïänärtha-darçanam,  describe  the  process  of
amänitvam  through 
knowledge  for  understanding  both  types  of  knower  of  the  field  of  activities,
namely the soul and the Supersoul. Then verses 13 through 18, beginning from
anädi mat-param and continuing through hådi sarvasya viñöhitam, describe the
soul and the Supreme Lord, or the Supersoul.

Thus three items have been described: the field of activity (the body), the
process of understanding, and both the soul and the Supersoul. It is especially
described  here  that  only  the  unalloyed  devotees  of  the  Lord  can  understand
these three items clearly. So for these devotees Bhagavad-gétä is fully useful; it
is  they  who  can  attain  the  supreme  goal,  the  nature  of  the  Supreme  Lord,
Kåñëa.  In  other  words,  only  devotees,  and  not  others,  can  understand
Bhagavad-gétä and derive the desired result.

TEXT  20

Pa[k*-iTa& Pauåz& cEv ivÖyNaadq o>aaviPa )

ivk-ara&ê Gau<aa&êEv iviÖ Pa[k*-iTaSaM>avaNa( )) 20 ))

prakåtià puruñaà caiva
viddhy anädé ubhäv api
vikäräàç ca guëäàç caiva
viddhi prakåti-sambhavän

SYNONYMS

prakåtim—material nature; puruñam—the living entities; ca—also;
eva—certainly; viddhi—you must know; anädé—without beginning;
ubhau—both; api—also; vikärän—transformations; ca—also; guëän—the
three modes of nature; ca—also; eva—certainly; viddhi—know;
prakåti—material nature; sambhavän—produced of.

TRANSLATION

Material nature and the living entities should be understood to be

beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter are products of
material nature.

PURPORT

By the knowledge given in this chapter, one can understand the body (the
field of activities) and the knowers of the body (both the individual soul and
the  Supersoul).  The  body  is  the  field  of  activity  and  is  composed  of  material
nature. The individual soul that is embodied and enjoying the activities of the
body is the puruña, or the living entity. He is one knower, and the other is the
Supersoul.  Of  course,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  both  the  Supersoul  and  the
individual  entity  are  different  manifestations  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of

Godhead. The living entity is in the category of His energy, and the Supersoul
is in the category of His personal expansion.

Both  material  nature  and  the  living  entity  are  eternal.  That  is  to  say  that
they existed before the creation. The material manifestation is from the energy
of the Supreme Lord, and so also are the living entities, but the living entities
are of the superior energy. Both the living entities and material nature existed
before  this  cosmos  was  manifested.  Material  nature  was  absorbed  in  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Mahä-Viñëu,  and  when  it  was  required,  it
was manifested by the agency of mahat-tattva. Similarly, the living entities are
also in Him, and because they are conditioned, they are averse to serving the
Supreme  Lord.  Thus  they  are  not  allowed  to  enter  into  the  spiritual  sky.  But
with the coming forth of material nature these living entities are again given a
chance to act in the material world and prepare themselves to enter into the
spiritual  world.  That  is  the  mystery  of  this  material  creation.  Actually  the
living entity is originally the spiritual part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, but
due to his rebellious nature, he is conditioned within material nature. It really
does  not  matter  how  these  living  entities  or  superior  entities  of  the  Supreme
Lord have come in contact with material nature. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead  knows,  however,  how  and  why  this  actually  took  place.  In  the
scriptures  the  Lord  says  that  those  attracted  by  this  material  nature  are
undergoing a hard struggle for existence. But we should know it with certainty
from  the  descriptions  of  these  few  verses  that  all  transformations  and
influences  of  material  nature  by  the  three  modes  are  also  productions  of
material  nature.  All  transformations  and  variety  in  respect  to  living  entities
are  due  to  the  body.  As  far  as  spirit  is  concerned,  living  entities  are  all  the
same.

TEXT  21

k-aYaRk-ar<ak-Ta*RTve heTau" Pa[k*-iTaåCYaTae )

Pauåz" Sau%du"%aNaa& >aae¢*-Tve heTauåCYaTae )) 21 ))

kärya-käraëa-kartåtve

hetuù prakåtir ucyate
puruñaù sukha-duùkhänäà
bhoktåtve hetur ucyate

SYNONYMS

kärya—of effect; käraëa—and cause; kartåtve—in the matter of creation;
hetuù—the instrument; prakåtiù—material nature; ucyate—is said to be;
puruñaù—the living entity; sukha—of happiness; duùkhänäm—and distress;
bhoktåtve—in enjoyment; hetuù—the instrument; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

Nature is said to be the cause of all material causes and effects, whereas the
living entity is the cause of the various sufferings and enjoyments in this world.

PURPORT

The  different  manifestations  of  body  and  senses  among  the  living  entities
are  due  to  material  nature.  There  are  8,400,000  different  species  of  life,  and
these  varieties  are  creations  of  the  material  nature.  They  arise  from  the
different sensual pleasures of the living entity, who thus desires to live in this
body or that. When he is put into different bodies, he enjoys different kinds of
happiness and distress. His material happiness and distress are due to his body,
and not to himself as he is. In his original state there is no doubt of enjoyment;
therefore  that  is  his  real  state.  Because  of  the  desire  to  lord  it  over  material
nature,  he  is  in  the  material  world.  In  the  spiritual  world  there  is  no  such
thing.  The  spiritual  world  is  pure,  but  in  the  material  world  everyone  is
struggling hard to acquire different kinds of pleasures for the body. It might be
more  clear  to  state  that  this  body  is  the  effect  of  the  senses.  The  senses  are
instruments  for  gratifying  desire.  Now,  the  sum  total—body  and  instrument
senses—are offered by material nature, and as will be clear in the next verse,
the living entity is blessed or damned with circumstances according to his past
desire  and  activity.  According  to  one’s  desires  and  activities,  material  nature

places one in various residential quarters. The being himself is the cause of his
attaining  such  residential  quarters  and  his  attendant  enjoyment  or  suffering.
Once  placed  in  some  particular  kind  of  body,  he  comes  under  the  control  of
nature because the body, being matter, acts according to the laws of nature. At
that time, the living entity has no power to change that law. Suppose an entity
is put into the body of a dog. As soon as he is put into the body of a dog, he
must  act  like  a  dog.  He  cannot  act  otherwise.  And  if  the  living  entity  is  put
into  the  body  of  a  hog,  then  he  is  forced  to  eat  stool  and  act  like  a  hog.
Similarly,  if  the  living  entity  is  put  into  the  body  of  a  demigod,  he  must  act
according to his body. This is the law of nature. But in all circumstances, the
Supersoul is with the individual soul. That is explained in the Vedas (Muëòaka
Upaniñad 3.1.1) as follows: dvä suparëä sayujä sakhäyaù. The Supreme Lord is so
kind  upon  the  living  entity  that  He  always  accompanies  the  individual  soul
and in all circumstances is present as the Supersoul, or Paramätmä.

TEXT  22

Pauåz" Pa[k*-iTaSQaae ih >au»e Pa[k*-iTaJaaNGau<aaNa( )

k-ar<a& Gau<aSa®ae_SYa SadSaÛaeiNaJaNMaSau )) 22 ))

puruñaù prakåti-stho hi
bhuìkte prakåti-jän guëän
käraëaà guëa-saìgo ’sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

SYNONYMS

puruñaù—the living entity; prakåti-sthaù—being situated in the material
energy; hi—certainly; bhuìkte—enjoys; prakåti-jän—produced by the material
nature; guëän—the modes of nature; käraëam—the cause; guëa-saìgaù—the
association with the modes of nature; asya—of the living entity; sat-asat—in
good and bad; yoni—species of life; janmasu—in births.

TRANSLATION

The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying

the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material
nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various species.

PURPORT

This verse is very important for an understanding of how the living entities
transmigrate from one body to another. It is explained in the Second Chapter
that  the  living  entity  is  transmigrating  from  one  body  to  another  just  as  one
changes  dress.  This  change  of  dress  is  due  to  his  attachment  to  material
existence.  As  long  as  he  is  captivated  by  this  false  manifestation,  he  has  to
continue transmigrating from one body to another. Due to his desire to lord it
over material nature, he is put into such undesirable circumstances. Under the
influence  of  material  desire,  the  entity  is  born  sometimes  as  a  demigod,
sometimes as a man, sometimes as a beast, as a bird, as a worm, as an aquatic, as
a  saintly  man,  as  a  bug.  This  is  going  on.  And  in  all  cases  the  living  entity
thinks  himself  to  be  the  master  of  his  circumstances,  yet  he  is  under  the
influence of material nature.

How  he  is  put  into  such  different  bodies  is  explained  here.  It  is  due  to
association  with  the  different  modes  of  nature.  One  has  to  rise,  therefore,
above  the  three  material  modes  and  become  situated  in  the  transcendental
position.  That  is  called  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Unless  one  is  situated  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, his material consciousness will oblige him to transfer from one
body to another because he has material desires since time immemorial. But he
has  to  change  that  conception.  That  change  can  be  effected  only  by  hearing
from  authoritative  sources.  The  best  example  is  here:  Arjuna  is  hearing  the
science  of  God  from  Kåñëa.  The  living  entity,  if  he  submits  to  this  hearing
process,  will  lose  his  long-cherished  desire  to  dominate  material  nature,  and
gradually  and  proportionately,  as  he  reduces  his  long  desire  to  dominate,  he
comes  to  enjoy  spiritual  happiness.  In  a  Vedic  mantra  it  is  said  that  as  he
becomes learned in association with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he

proportionately relishes his eternal blissful life.

TEXT  23

oPad]íaNauMaNTaa c >aTaaR >aae¢-a Maheìr" )

ParMaaTMaeiTa caPYau¢-ae dehe_iSMaNPauåz" Par" )) 23 ))

upadrañöänumantä ca
bhartä bhoktä maheçvaraù
paramätmeti cäpy ukto
dehe ’smin puruñaù paraù

SYNONYMS

upadrañöä—overseer; anumantä—permitter; ca—also; bhartä—master;
bhoktä—supreme enjoyer; mahä-éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord;
parama-ätmä—the Supersoul; iti—also; ca—and; api—indeed; uktaù—is said;
dehe—in the body; asmin—this; puruñaù—enjoyer; paraù—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer, who is the Lord,

the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter, and who is
known as the Supersoul.

PURPORT

It is stated here that the Supersoul, who is always with the individual soul,
is the representation of the Supreme Lord. He is not an ordinary living entity.
Because the monist philosophers take the knower of the body to be one, they
think  that  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Supersoul  and  the  individual
soul. To clarify this, the Lord says that He is represented as the Paramätmä in
every  body.  He 
is  para,
transcendental.  The  individual  soul  enjoys  the  activities  of  a  particular  field,

is  different  from  the 

individual  soul;  He 

but  the  Supersoul  is  present  not  as  finite  enjoyer  nor  as  one  taking  part  in
bodily activities, but as the witness, overseer, permitter and supreme enjoyer.
His  name  is  Paramätmä,  not  ätmä,  and  He  is  transcendental.  It  is  distinctly
clear  that  the  ätmä  and  Paramätmä  are  different.  The  Supersoul,  the
Paramätmä,  has  legs  and  hands  everywhere,  but  the  individual  soul  does  not.
And  because  the  Paramätmä  is  the  Supreme  Lord,  He  is  present  within  to
sanction  the  individual  soul’s  desiring  material  enjoyment.  Without  the
sanction  of  the  Supreme  Soul,  the  individual  soul  cannot  do  anything.  The
individual  is  bhukta,  or  the  sustained,  and  the  Lord  is  bhoktä,  or  the
maintainer. There are innumerable living entities, and He is staying in them
as a friend.

The fact is that every individual living entity is eternally part and parcel of
the Supreme Lord, and both of them are very intimately related as friends. But
the living entity has the tendency to reject the sanction of the Supreme Lord
and act independently in an attempt to dominate nature, and because he has
this tendency he is called the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord. The living
entity can be situated either in the material energy or in the spiritual energy.
As long as he is conditioned by the material energy, the Supreme Lord, as his
friend, the Supersoul, stays with him just to get him to return to the spiritual
energy. The Lord is always eager to take him back to the spiritual energy, but
due to his minute independence the individual entity is continually rejecting
the association of spiritual light. This misuse of independence is the cause of
his  material  strife  in  the  conditioned  nature.  The  Lord,  therefore,  is  always
giving  instruction  from  within  and  from  without.  From  without  He  gives
instructions as stated in Bhagavad-gétä, and from within He tries to convince
the  living  entity  that  his  activities  in  the  material  field  are  not  conducive  to
real happiness. “Just give it up and turn your faith toward Me. Then you will be
happy,”  He  says.  Thus  the  intelligent  person  who  places  his  faith  in  the
Paramätmä or the Supreme Personality of Godhead begins to advance toward
a blissful eternal life of knowledge.

TEXT  24

Ya Wv& veita Pauåz& Pa[k*-iTa& c Gau<aE" Sah )

SavRQaa vTaRMaaNaae_iPa Na Sa >aUYaae_i>aJaaYaTae )) 24 ))

ya evaà vetti puruñaà
prakåtià ca guëaiù saha
sarvathä vartamäno ’pi
na sa bhüyo ’bhijäyate

SYNONYMS

yaù—anyone who; evam—thus; vetti—understands; puruñam—the living
entity; prakåtim—material nature; ca—and; guëaiù—the modes of material
nature; saha—with; sarvathä—in all ways; vartamänaù—being situated;
api—in spite of; na—never; saù—he; bhüyaù—again; abhijäyate—takes his
birth.

TRANSLATION

One who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the living
entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure to attain liberation. He
will not take birth here again, regardless of his present position.

PURPORT

Clear understanding of material nature, the Supersoul, the individual soul
and their interrelation makes one eligible to become liberated and turn to the
spiritual  atmosphere  without  being  forced  to  return  to  this  material  nature.
This  is  the  result  of  knowledge.  The  purpose  of  knowledge  is  to  understand
distinctly  that  the  living  entity  has  by  chance  fallen  into  this  material
existence.  By  his  personal  endeavor  in  association  with  authorities,  saintly
persons  and  a  spiritual  master,  he  has  to  understand  his  position  and  then
revert  to  spiritual  consciousness  or  Kåñëa  consciousness  by  understanding
Bhagavad-gétä  as  it  is  explained  by  the  Personality  of  Godhead.  Then  it  is
certain  that  he  will  never  come  again  into this material existence; he will be

transferred into the spiritual world for a blissful eternal life of knowledge.

TEXT  25

DYaaNaeNaaTMaiNa PaXYaiNTa ke-icdaTMaaNaMaaTMaNaa )

ANYae Saa&:YaeNa YaaeGaeNa k-MaRYaaeGaeNa caPare )) 25 ))

dhyänenätmani paçyanti
kecid ätmänam ätmanä
anye säìkhyena yogena
karma-yogena cäpare

SYNONYMS

dhyänena—by meditation; ätmani—within the self; paçyanti—see;
kecit—some; ätmänam—the Supersoul; ätmanä—by the mind; anye—others;
säìkhyena—of philosophical discussion; yogena—by the yoga system;
karma-yogena—by activities without fruitive desire; ca—also; apare—others.

TRANSLATION

Some perceive the Supersoul within themselves through meditation, others
through the cultivation of knowledge, and still others through working without
fruitive desires.

PURPORT

The  Lord  informs  Arjuna  that  the  conditioned  souls  can  be  divided  into
two classes as far as man’s search for self-realization is concerned. Those who
are  atheists,  agnostics  and  skeptics  are  beyond  the  sense  of  spiritual
understanding. But there are others, who are faithful in their understanding of
spiritual  life,  and  they  are  called  introspective  devotees,  philosophers,  and
workers who have renounced fruitive results. Those who always try to establish
the doctrine of monism are also counted among the atheists and agnostics. In

other words, only the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are best
situated in spiritual understanding, because they understand that beyond this
material  nature  are  the  spiritual  world  and  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, who is expanded as the Paramätmä, the Supersoul in everyone, the
all-pervading  Godhead.  Of  course  there  are  those  who  try  to  understand  the
Supreme  Absolute  Truth  by  cultivation  of  knowledge,  and  they  can  be
counted  in  the  class  of  the  faithful.  The  Säìkhya  philosophers  analyze  this
material world into twenty-four elements, and they place the individual soul as
the  twenty-fifth  item.  When  they  are  able  to  understand  the  nature  of  the
individual soul to be transcendental to the material elements, they are able to
understand  also  that  above  the  individual  soul  there  is  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is the twenty-sixth element. Thus gradually they
also come to the standard of devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness. Those
who  work  without  fruitive  results  are  also  perfect  in  their  attitude.  They  are
given  a  chance  to  advance  to  the  platform  of  devotional  service  in  Kåñëa
consciousness.  Here  it  is  stated  that  there  are  some  people  who  are  pure  in
consciousness and who try to find out the Supersoul by meditation, and when
they discover the Supersoul within themselves, they become transcendentally
situated.  Similarly,  there  are  others  who  also  try  to  understand  the  Supreme
Soul  by  cultivation  of  knowledge,  and  there  are  others  who  cultivate  the
haöha-yoga system and who try to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead
by childish activities.

TEXT  26

ANYae TvevMaJaaNaNTa" é[uTvaNYae>Ya oPaaSaTae )

Tae_iPa caiTaTarNTYaev Ma*TYau& é[uiTaParaYa<aa" )) 26 ))

anye tv evam ajänantaù
çrutvänyebhya upäsate
te ’pi cätitaranty eva
måtyuà çruti-paräyaëäù

SYNONYMS

anye—others; tu—but; evam—thus; ajänantaù—without spiritual knowledge;
çrutvä—by hearing; anyebhyaù—from others; upäsate—begin to worship;
te—they; api—also; ca—and; atitaranti—transcend; eva—certainly;
måtyum—the path of death; çruti-paräyaëäù—inclined to the process of
hearing.

TRANSLATION

Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual knowledge,

begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Him from others.
Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, they also transcend the path
of birth and death.

PURPORT

This  verse  is  particularly  applicable  to  modern  society  because  in  modern
society  there  is  practically  no  education  in  spiritual  matters.  Some  of  the
people  may  appear  to  be  atheistic  or  agnostic  or  philosophical,  but  actually
there is no knowledge of philosophy. As for the common man, if he is a good
soul, then there is a chance for advancement by hearing. This hearing process
is  very  important.  Lord  Caitanya,  who  preached  Kåñëa  consciousness  in  the
modern world, gave great stress to hearing because if the common man simply
hears from authoritative sources he can progress, especially, according to Lord
Caitanya,  if  he  hears  the  transcendental  vibration  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. It
is  stated,  therefore,  that  all  men  should  take  advantage  of  hearing  from
realized  souls  and  gradually  become  able  to  understand  everything.  The
worship of the Supreme Lord will then undoubtedly take place. Lord Caitanya
has said that in this age no one needs to change his position, but one should
give  up  the  endeavor  to  understand  the  Absolute  Truth  by  speculative
reasoning.  One  should  learn  to  become  the  servant  of  those  who  are  in

knowledge of the Supreme Lord. If one is fortunate enough to take shelter of a
pure devotee, hear from him about self-realization and follow in his footsteps,
one will be gradually elevated to the position of a pure devotee. In this verse
particularly, the process of hearing is strongly recommended, and this is very
appropriate.  Although  the  common  man  is  often  not  as  capable  as  so-called
philosophers,  faithful  hearing  from  an  authoritative  person  will  help  one
transcend this material existence and go back to Godhead, back to home.

TEXT  27

YaavTSaÅaYaTae ik-iÄTSatv& SQaavrJa®MaMa( )

+ae}a+ae}ajSa&YaaeGaataiÜiÖ >arTazR>a )) 27 ))

yävat saïjäyate kiïcit
sattvaà sthävara-jaìgamam
kñetra-kñetrajïa-saàyogät
tad viddhi bharatarñabha

SYNONYMS

yävat—whatever; saïjäyate—comes into being; kiïcit—anything;
sattvam—existence; sthävara—not moving; jaìgamam—moving; kñetra—of
the body; kñetra-jïa—and the knower of the body; saàyogät—by the union
between; tat viddhi—you must know it; bharata-åñabha—O chief of the
Bhäratas.

TRANSLATION

O chief of the Bhäratas, know that whatever you see in existence, both the
moving and the nonmoving, is only a combination of the field of activities and
the knower of the field.

PURPORT

Both material nature and the living entity, which were existing before the
creation of the cosmos, are explained in this verse. Whatever is created is but a
combination  of  the  living  entity  and  material  nature.  There  are  many
manifestations like trees, mountains and hills which are not moving, and there
are many existences which are moving, and all of them are but combinations
of  material  nature  and  the  superior  nature,  the  living  entity.  Without  the
touch  of  the  superior  nature,  the  living  entity,  nothing  can  grow.  The
relationship  between  matter  and  nature  is  eternally  going  on,  and  this
combination is effected by the Supreme Lord; therefore He is the controller of
both the superior and inferior natures. The material nature is created by Him,
and  the  superior  nature  is  placed  in  this  material  nature,  and  thus  all  these
activities and manifestations take place.

TEXT  28

SaMa& SaveRzu >aUTaezu iTaïNTa& ParMaeìrMa( )

ivNaXYaTSvivNaXYaNTa& Ya" PaXYaiTa Sa PaXYaiTa )) 28 ))

samaà sarveñu bhüteñu
tiñöhantaà parameçvaram
vinaçyatsv avinaçyantaà
yaù paçyati sa paçyati

SYNONYMS

samam—equally; sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living entities;
tiñöhan-tam—residing; parama-éçvaram—the Supersoul; vinaçyatsu—in the
destructible; avinaçyantam—not destroyed; yaù—anyone who; paçyati—sees;
saù—he; paçyati—actually sees.

TRANSLATION

One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all bodies,

and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul within the

destructible body is ever destroyed, actually sees.

PURPORT

Anyone  who  by  good  association  can  see  three  things  combined
together—the  body,  the  proprietor  of  the  body,  or  individual  soul,  and  the
friend  of  the  individual  soul—is  actually  in  knowledge.  Unless  one  has  the
association  of  a  real  knower  of  spiritual  subjects,  one  cannot  see  these  three
things. Those who do not have such association are ignorant; they simply see
the  body,  and  they  think  that  when  the  body  is  destroyed  everything  is
finished. But actually it is not so. After the destruction of the body, both the
soul and the Supersoul exist, and they go on eternally in many various moving
and nonmoving forms. The Sanskrit word parameçvara is sometimes translated
as “the individual soul” because the soul is the master of the body and after the
destruction of the body he transfers to another form. In that way he is master.
But  there  are  others  who  interpret  this  parameçvara  to  be  the  Supersoul.  In
either case, both the Supersoul and the individual soul continue. They are not
destroyed. One who can see in this way can actually see what is happening.

TEXT  29

SaMa& PaXYaiNh SavR}a SaMaviSQaTaMaqìrMa( )

Na ihNaSTYaaTMaNaaTMaaNa& TaTaae YaaiTa Para& GaiTaMa( )) 29 ))

samaà paçyan hi sarvatra
samavasthitam éçvaram
na hinasty ätmanätmänaà
tato yäti paräà gatim

SYNONYMS

samam—equally; paçyan—seeing; hi—certainly; sarvatra—everywhere;
samavasthitam—equally situated; éçvaram—the Supersoul; na—does not;
hinasti—degrade; ätmanä—by the mind; ätmänam—the soul; tataù—then;

yäti—reaches; paräm—the transcendental; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

One who sees the Supersoul equally present everywhere, in every living

being, does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the
transcendental destination.

PURPORT

The living entity, by accepting his material existence, has become situated
differently  than  in  his  spiritual  existence.  But  if  one  understands  that  the
Supreme is situated in His Paramätmä manifestation everywhere, that is, if one
can  see  the  presence  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  in  every  living
thing, he does not degrade himself by a destructive mentality, and he therefore
gradually  advances  to  the  spiritual  world.  The  mind  is  generally  addicted  to
sense  gratifying  processes;  but  when  the  mind  turns  to  the  Supersoul,  one
becomes advanced in spiritual understanding.

TEXT  30

Pa[k*-TYaEv c k-MaaRi<a i§-YaMaa<aaiNa SavRXa" )

Ya" PaXYaiTa TaQaaTMaaNaMak-TaaRr& Sa PaXYaiTa )) 30 ))

prakåtyaiva ca karmäëi
kriyamäëäni sarvaçaù
yaù paçyati tathätmänam
akartäraà sa paçyati

SYNONYMS

prakåtyä—by material nature; eva—certainly; ca—also; karmäëi—activities;
kriyamäëäni—being performed; sarvaçaù—in all respects; yaù—anyone who;
paçyati—sees; tathä—also; ätmänam—himself; akartäram—the nondoer;

saù—he; paçyati—sees perfectly.

TRANSLATION

One who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is
created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing, actually sees.

PURPORT

This body is made by material nature under the direction of the Supersoul,
and whatever activities are going on in respect to one’s body are not his doing.
Whatever  one  is  supposed  to  do,  either  for  happiness  or  for  distress,  one  is
forced to do because of the bodily constitution. The self, however, is outside all
these  bodily  activities.  This  body  is  given  according  to  one’s  past  desires.  To
fulfill  desires,  one  is  given  the  body,  with  which  he  acts  accordingly.
Practically speaking, the body is a machine, designed by the Supreme Lord, to
fulfill  desires.  Because  of  desires,  one  is  put  into  difficult  circumstances  to
suffer  or  to  enjoy.  This  transcendental  vision  of  the  living  entity,  when
developed,  makes  one  separate  from  bodily  activities.  One  who  has  such  a
vision is an actual seer.

TEXT  31

Yada >aUTaPa*QaG>aavMaek-SQaMaNauPaXYaiTa )

TaTa Wv c ivSTaar& b]ø SaMPaÛTae Tada )) 31 ))

yadä bhüta-påthag-bhävam
eka-stham anupaçyati
tata eva ca vistäraà
brahma sampadyate tadä

SYNONYMS

yadä—when; bhüta—of living entities; påthak-bhävam—separated identities;

eka-stham—situated in one; anupaçyati—one tries to see through authority;
tataù eva—thereafter; ca—also; vistäram—the expansion; brahma—the
Absolute; sampadyate—he attains; tadä—at that time.

TRANSLATION

When a sensible man ceases to see different identities due to different
material bodies and he sees how beings are expanded everywhere, he attains to
the Brahman conception.

PURPORT

When one can see that the various bodies of living entities arise due to the
different desires of the individual soul and do not actually belong to the soul
itself, one actually sees. In the material conception of life, we find someone a
demigod, someone a human being, a dog, a cat, etc. This is material vision, not
actual vision. This material differentiation is due to a material conception of
life. After the destruction of the material body, the spirit soul is one. The spirit
soul, due to contact with material nature, gets different types of bodies. When
one  can  see  this,  he  attains  spiritual  vision;  thus  being  freed  from
differentiations  like  man,  animal,  big,  low,  etc.,  one  becomes  purified  in  his
consciousness and able to develop Kåñëa consciousness in his spiritual identity.
How he then sees things will be explained in the next verse.

TEXT  32

ANaaidTvaiàGauR<aTvaTParMaaTMaaYaMaVYaYa" )

XarqrSQaae_iPa k-aENTaeYa Na k-raeiTa Na il/PYaTae )) 32 ))

anäditvän nirguëatvät
paramätmäyam avyayaù
çaréra-stho ’pi kaunteya
na karoti na lipyate

SYNONYMS

anäditvät—due to eternity; nirguëatvät—due to being transcendental;
parama—beyond material nature; ätmä—spirit; ayam—this;
avyayaù—inexhaustible; çaréra-sthaù—dwelling in the body; api—though;
kaunteya—O son of Kunté; na karoti—never does anything; na lipyate—nor is
he entangled.

TRANSLATION

Those with the vision of eternity can see that the imperishable soul is
transcendental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despite contact with
the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither does anything nor is entangled.

PURPORT

A living entity appears to be born because of the birth of the material body,
but actually the living entity is eternal; he is not born, and in spite of his being
situated in a material body, he is transcendental and eternal. Thus he cannot
be  destroyed.  By  nature  he  is  full  of  bliss.  He does not engage himself in any
material  activities;  therefore  the  activities  performed  due  to  his  contact  with
material bodies do not entangle him.

TEXT  33

YaQaa SavRGaTa& SaaE+MYaadak-aXa& NaaePail/PYaTae )

SavR}aaviSQaTaae dehe TaQaaTMaa NaaePail/PYaTae )) 33 ))

yathä sarva-gataà saukñmyäd
äkäçaà nopalipyate
sarvaträvasthito dehe
tathätmä nopalipyate

SYNONYMS

yathä—as; sarva-gatam—all-pervading; saukñmyät—due to being subtle;
äkäçam—the sky; na—never; upalipyate—mixes; sarvatra—everywhere;
avasthitaù—situated; dehe—in the body; tathä—so; ätmä—the self; na—never;
upalipyate—mixes.

TRANSLATION

The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although it is
all-pervading. Similarly, the soul situated in Brahman vision does not mix with
the body, though situated in that body.

PURPORT

The air enters into water, mud, stool and whatever else is there; still it does
not  mix  with  anything.  Similarly,  the  living  entity,  even  though  situated  in
varieties of bodies, is aloof from them due to his subtle nature. Therefore it is
impossible to see with the material eyes how the living entity is in contact with
this body and how he is out of it after the destruction of the body. No one in
science can ascertain this.

TEXT  34

YaQaa Pa[k-aXaYaTYaek-" k*-Tò& l/aek-iMaMa& riv" )

+ae}a& +ae}aq TaQaa k*-Tò& Pa[k-aXaYaiTa >aarTa )) 34 ))

yathä prakäçayaty ekaù
kåtsnaà lokam imaà raviù
kñetraà kñetré tathä kåtsnaà
prakäçayati bhärata

SYNONYMS

yathä—as; prakäçayati—illuminates; ekaù—one; kåtsnam—the whole;
lokam—universe; imam—this; raviù—sun; kñetram—this body; kñetré—the
soul; tathä—similarly; kåtsnam—all; prakäçayati—illuminates; bhärata—O son
of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so does the
living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire body by consciousness.

PURPORT

There  are  various  theories  regarding  consciousness.  Here  in  Bhagavad-gétä
the example of the sun and the sunshine is given. As the sun is situated in one
place but is illuminating the whole universe, so a small particle of spirit soul,
although situated in the heart of this body, is illuminating the whole body by
consciousness. Thus consciousness is the proof of the presence of the soul, as
sunshine  or  light  is  the  proof  of  the  presence  of  the  sun.  When  the  soul  is
present in the body, there is consciousness all over the body, and as soon as the
soul  has  passed  from  the  body  there  is  no  more  consciousness.  This  can  be
easily  understood  by  any  intelligent  man.  Therefore  consciousness  is  not  a
product of the combinations of matter. It is the symptom of the living entity.
The  consciousness  of  the  living  entity,  although  qualitatively  one  with  the
supreme  consciousness,  is  not  supreme,  because  the  consciousness  of  one
particular body does not share that of another body. But the Supersoul, which
is situated in all bodies as the friend of the individual soul, is conscious of all
bodies.  That  is  the  difference  between  supreme  consciousness  and  individual
consciousness.

TEXT  35

+ae}a+ae}ajYaaerevMaNTar& jaNac+auza )

>aUTaPa[k*-iTaMaae+a& c Yae ivduYaaRiNTa Tae ParMa( )) 35 ))

kñetra-kñetrajïayor evam
antaraà jïäna-cakñuñä
bhüta-prakåti-mokñaà ca
ye vidur yänti te param

SYNONYMS

kñetra—of the body; kñetra-jïayoù—of the proprietor of the body; evam—thus;
antaram—the difference; jïäna-cakñuñä—by the vision of knowledge;
bhüta—of the living entity; prakåti—from material nature; mokñam—the
liberation; ca—also; ye—those who; viduù—know; yänti—approach; te—they;
param—the Supreme.

TRANSLATION

Those who see with eyes of knowledge the difference between the body and
the knower of the body, and can also understand the process of liberation from
bondage in material nature, attain to the supreme goal.

PURPORT

The  purport  of  this  Thirteenth  Chapter  is  that  one  should  know  the
distinction between the body, the owner of the body, and the Supersoul. One
should recognize the process of liberation, as described in verses eight through
twelve. Then one can go on to the supreme destination.

A faithful person should at first have some good association to hear of God
and thus gradually become enlightened. If one accepts a spiritual master, one
can  learn  to  distinguish  between  matter  and  spirit,  and  that  becomes  the
steppingstone  for  further  spiritual  realization.  A  spiritual  master,  by  various
instructions, teaches his students to get free from the material concept of life.
For  instance,  in  Bhagavad-gétä  we  find  Kåñëa  instructing  Arjuna  to  free  him
from materialistic considerations.

One  can  understand  that  this  body  is  matter;  it  can  be  analyzed  with  its
twenty-four  elements.  The  body  is  the  gross  manifestation.  And  the  subtle

manifestation is the mind and psychological effects. And the symptoms of life
are the interaction of these features. But over and above this, there is the soul,
and  there  is  also  the  Supersoul.  The  soul  and  the  Supersoul  are  two.  This
material world is working by the conjunction of the soul and the twenty-four
material  elements.  One  who  can  see  the  constitution  of  the  whole  material
manifestation  as  this  combination  of  the  soul  and  material  elements  and  can
also see the situation of the Supreme Soul becomes eligible for transfer to the
spiritual world. These things are meant for contemplation and for realization,
and one should have a complete understanding of this chapter with the help of
the spiritual master.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Thirteenth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Nature, the Enjoyer and Consciousness.

- CHAPTER 14 -
The Three Modes Of Material Nature

TEXT  1

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

Par& >aUYa" Pa[v+YaaiMa jaNaaNaa& jaNaMautaMaMa( )

YaJjaTva MauNaYa" SaveR Para& iSaiÖiMaTaae GaTaa" )) 1 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
paraà bhüyaù pravakñyämi
jïänänäà jïänam uttamam
yaj jïätvä munayaù sarve

paräà siddhim ito gatäù

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
param—transcendental; bhüyaù—again; pravakñyämi—I shall speak;
jïänänäm—of all knowledge; jïänam—knowledge; uttamam—the supreme;
yat—which; jïätvä—knowing; munayaù—the sages; sarve—all;
paräm—transcendental; siddhim—perfection; itaù—from this world;
gatäù—attained.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Again I shall declare to you this

supreme wisdom, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have
attained the supreme perfection.

PURPORT

From the Seventh Chapter to the end of the Twelfth Chapter, Çré Kåñëa in
detail reveals the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now,
the  Lord  Himself  is  further  enlightening  Arjuna.  If  one  understands  this
chapter  through  the  process  of  philosophical  speculation,  he  will  come  to  an
understanding of devotional service. In the Thirteenth Chapter, it was clearly
explained  that  by  humbly  developing  knowledge  one  may  possibly  be  freed
from  material  entanglement.  It  has  also  been  explained  that  it  is  due  to
association with the modes of nature that the living entity is entangled in this
material  world.  Now,  in  this  chapter,  the  Supreme  Personality  explains  what
those  modes  of  nature  are,  how  they  act,  how  they  bind  and  how  they  give
liberation.  The  knowledge  explained  in  this  chapter  is  proclaimed  by  the
Supreme Lord to be superior to the knowledge given so far in other chapters.
By understanding this knowledge, various great sages attained perfection and
transferred to the spiritual world. The Lord now explains the same knowledge
in  a  better  way.  This  knowledge  is  far,  far  superior  to  all  other  processes  of

knowledge  thus  far  explained,  and  knowing  this  many  attained  perfection.
Thus  it  is  expected  that  one  who  understands  this  Fourteenth  Chapter  will
attain perfection.

TEXT  2

wd& jaNaMauPaaié[TYa MaMa SaaDaMYaRMaaGaTaa" )

SaGaeR_iPa NaaePaJaaYaNTae Pa[l/Yae Na VYaQaiNTa c )) 2 ))

idaà jïänam upäçritya
mama sädharmyam ägatäù
sarge ’pi nopajäyante
pralaye na vyathanti ca

SYNONYMS

idam—this; jïänam—knowledge; upäçritya—taking shelter of; mama—My;
sädharmyam—same nature; ägatäù—having attained; sarge api—even in the
creation; na—never; upajäyante—are born; pralaye—in the annihilation;
na—nor; vyathanti—are disturbed; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

By becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the transcendental
nature like My own. Thus established, one is not born at the time of creation or
disturbed at the time of dissolution.

PURPORT

After acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires qualitative
equality  with  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  becoming  free  from  the
repetition  of  birth  and  death.  One  does  not,  however,  lose  his  identity  as  an
individual soul. It is understood from Vedic literature that the liberated souls
who  have  reached  the  transcendental  planets of the spiritual sky always look

to  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  being  engaged  in  His  transcendental
loving  service.  So,  even  after  liberation,  the  devotees  do  not  lose  their
individual identities.

Generally, 

in  the  material  world,  whatever  knowledge  we  get 

is
contaminated by the three modes of material nature. Knowledge which is not
contaminated  by  the  three  modes  of  nature  is  called  transcendental
knowledge. As soon as one is situated in that transcendental knowledge, he is
on the same platform as the Supreme Person. Those who have no knowledge of
the spiritual sky hold that after being freed from the material activities of the
material  form,  this  spiritual 
identity  becomes  formless,  without  any
variegatedness. However, just as there is material variegatedness in this world,
in  the  spiritual  world  there  is  also  variegatedness.  Those  in  ignorance  of  this
think  that  spiritual  existence  is  opposed  to  material  variety.  But  actually,  in
the spiritual sky, one attains a spiritual form. There are spiritual activities, and
the  spiritual  situation  is  called  devotional  life.  That  atmosphere  is  said  to  be
uncontaminated, and there one is equal in quality with the Supreme Lord. To
obtain such knowledge, one must develop all the spiritual qualities. One who
thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either by the creation or by
the destruction of the material world.

TEXT  3

MaMa YaaeiNaMaRhd(Ba]ø TaiSMaNGa>a| dDaaMYahMa( )

SaM>av" SavR>aUTaaNaa& TaTaae >aviTa >aarTa )) 3 ))

mama yonir mahad brahma
tasmin garbhaà dadhämy aham
sambhavaù sarva-bhütänäà
tato bhavati bhärata

SYNONYMS

mama—My; yoniù—source of birth; mahat—the total material existence;

brahma—supreme; tasmin—in that; garbham—pregnancy; dadhämi—create;
aham—I; sambhavaù—the possibility; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities;
tataù—thereafter; bhavati—becomes; bhärata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

The total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth, and it is
that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births of all living beings,
O son of Bharata.

PURPORT

This  is  an  explanation  of  the  world:  everything  that  takes  place  is  due  to
the  combination  of  kñetra  and  kñetra-jïa,  the  body  and  the  spirit  soul.  This
combination  of  material  nature  and  the  living  entity  is  made  possible  by  the
Supreme God Himself. The mahat-tattva is the total cause of the total cosmic
manifestation;  and  that  total  substance  of  the  material  cause,  in  which  there
are  three  modes  of  nature,  is  sometimes  called  Brahman.  The  Supreme
Personality impregnates that total substance, and thus innumerable universes
become possible. This total material substance, the mahat-tattva, is described as
Brahman  in  the  Vedic  literature  (Muëòaka Upaniñad  1.1.19):  tasmäd  etad
brahma  näma-rüpam  annaà  ca  jäyate.  The  Supreme  Person  impregnates  that
Brahman  with  the  seeds  of  the  living  entities.  The  twenty-four  elements,
beginning  from  earth,  water,  fire  and  air,  are  all  material  energy,  and  they
constitute  what  is  called  mahad  brahma,  or  the  great  Brahman,  the  material
nature.  As  explained  in  the  Seventh  Chapter,  beyond  this  there  is  another,
superior nature—the living entity. Into material nature the superior nature is
mixed  by  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  thereafter  all
living entities are born of this material nature.

The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is said that the
scorpion  is  born  out  of  rice.  But  the  rice  is  not  the  cause  of  the  scorpion.
Actually,  the  eggs  were  laid  by  the  mother.  Similarly,  material  nature  is  not
the cause of the birth of the living entities. The seed is given by the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  and  they  only  seem  to  come  out  as  products  of

material nature. Thus every living entity, according to his past activities, has a
different body, created by this material nature, so that the entity can enjoy or
suffer  according  to  his  past  deeds.  The  Lord  is  the  cause  of  all  the
manifestations of living entities in this material world.

TEXT  4

SavRYaaeiNazu k-aENTaeYa MaUTaRYa" SaM>aviNTa Yaa" )

TaaSaa& b]ø MahÛaeiNarh& bqJaPa[d" iPaTaa )) 4 ))

sarva-yoniñu kaunteya
mürtayaù sambhavanti yäù
täsäà brahma mahad yonir
ahaà béja-pradaù pitä

SYNONYMS

sarva-yoniñu—in all species of life; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
mürtayaù—forms; sambhavanti—they appear; yäù—which; täsäm—of all of
them; brahma—the supreme; mahat yoniù—source of birth in the material
substance; aham—I; béja-pradaù—the seed-giving; pitä—father.

TRANSLATION

It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunté, are made
possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  it  is  clearly  explained  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, Kåñëa, is the original father of all living entities. The living entities
are combinations of the material nature and the spiritual nature. Such living
entities  are  seen  not  only  on  this  planet  but  on  every  planet,  even  on  the
highest, where Brahmä is situated. Everywhere there are living entities; within

the earth there are living entities, even within water and within fire. All these
appearances  are  due  to  the  mother,  material  nature,  and  Kåñëa’s  seed-giving
process.  The  purport  is  that  the  material  world  is  impregnated  with  living
entities,  who  come  out  in  various  forms  at  the  time  of  creation  according  to
their past deeds.

TEXT  5

Satv& rJaSTaMa wiTa Gau<aa" Pa[k*-iTaSaM>ava" )

iNabDNaiNTa Mahabahae dehe deihNaMaVYaYaMa( )) 5 ))

sattvaà rajas tama iti
guëäù prakåti-sambhaväù
nibadhnanti mahä-bäho
dehe dehinam avyayam

SYNONYMS

sattvam—the mode of goodness; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the
mode of ignorance; iti—thus; guëäù—the qualities; prakåti—material nature;
sambhaväù—produced of; nibadhnanti—do condition; mahä-bäho—O
mighty-armed one; dehe—in this body; dehinam—the living entity;
avyayam—eternal.

TRANSLATION

Material nature consists of three modes—goodness, passion and ignorance.
When the eternal living entity comes in contact with nature, O mighty-armed
Arjuna, he becomes conditioned by these modes.

PURPORT

The living entity, because he is transcendental, has nothing to do with this
material  nature.  Still,  because  he  has  become  conditioned  by  the  material

world,  he  is  acting  under  the  spell  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.
Because living entities have different kinds of bodies, in terms of the different
aspects of nature, they are induced to act according to that nature. This is the
cause of the varieties of happiness and distress.

TEXT  6

Ta}a Satv& iNaMaRl/TvaTPa[k-aXak-MaNaaMaYaMa( )

Sau%Sa®eNa bDNaaiTa jaNaSa®eNa caNaga )) 6 ))

tatra sattvaà nirmalatvät
prakäçakam anämayam
sukha-saìgena badhnäti
jïäna-saìgena cänagha

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; sattvam—the mode of goodness; nirmalatvät—being purest in
the material world; prakäçakam—illuminating; anämayam—without any sinful
reaction; sukha—with happiness; saìgena—by association;
badhnäti—conditions; jïäna—with knowledge; saìgena—by association;
ca—also; anagha—O sinless one.

TRANSLATION

O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is

illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those situated in that
mode become conditioned by a sense of happiness and knowledge.

PURPORT

The living entities conditioned by material nature are of various types. One
is  happy,  another  is  very  active,  and  another  is  helpless.  All  these  types  of
psychological  manifestations  are  causes  of  the  entities’  conditioned  status  in

nature.  How  they  are  differently  conditioned  is  explained  in  this  section  of
Bhagavad-gétä.  The  mode  of  goodness  is  first  considered.  The  effect  of
developing  the  mode  of  goodness  in  the  material  world  is  that  one  becomes
wiser than those otherwise conditioned. A man in the mode of goodness is not
so much affected by material miseries, and he has a sense of advancement in
material knowledge. The representative type is the brähmaëa, who is supposed
to  be  situated  in  the  mode  of  goodness.  This  sense  of  happiness  is  due  to
understanding  that,  in  the  mode  of  goodness,  one  is  more  or  less  free  from
sinful  reactions.  Actually,  in  the  Vedic  literature  it  is  said  that  the  mode  of
goodness means greater knowledge and a greater sense of happiness.

The  difficulty  here  is  that  when  a  living  entity  is  situated  in  the  mode  of
goodness he becomes conditioned to feel that he is advanced in knowledge and
is better than others. In this way he becomes conditioned. The best examples
are the scientist and the philosopher. Each is very proud of his knowledge, and
because  they  generally  improve  their  living  conditions,  they  feel  a  sort  of
material  happiness.  This  sense  of  advanced  happiness  in  conditioned  life
makes them bound by the mode of goodness of material nature. As such, they
are  attracted  toward  working  in  the  mode  of  goodness,  and,  as  long  as  they
have  an  attraction  for  working  in  that  way,  they  have  to  take  some  type  of
body  in  the  modes  of  nature.  Thus  there  is  no  likelihood  of  liberation,  or  of
being  transferred  to  the  spiritual  world.  Repeatedly  one  may  become  a
philosopher, a scientist or a poet, and repeatedly become entangled in the same
disadvantages  of  birth  and  death.  But,  due  to  the  illusion  of  the  material
energy, one thinks that that sort of life is pleasant.

TEXT  7

rJaae raGaaTMak&- iviÖ Ta*Z<aaSa®SaMauÙvMa( )

TaiàbDNaaiTa k-aENTaeYa k-MaRSa®eNa deihNaMa( )) 7 ))

rajo rägätmakaà viddhi
tåñëä-saìga-samudbhavam
tan nibadhnäti kaunteya

karma-saìgena dehinam

SYNONYMS

rajaù—the mode of passion; räga-ätmakam—born of desire or lust;
viddhi—know; tåñëä—with hankering; saìga—association;
samudbhavam—produced of; tat—that; nibadhnäti—binds; kaunteya—O son
of Kunté; karma-saìgena—by association with fruitive activity; dehinam—the
embodied.

TRANSLATION

The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O son of
Kunté, and because of this the embodied living entity is bound to material
fruitive actions.

PURPORT

The  mode  of  passion  is  characterized  by  the  attraction  between  man  and
woman.  Woman  has  attraction  for  man,  and  man  has  attraction  for  woman.
This is called the mode of passion. And when the mode of passion is increased,
one develops the hankering for material enjoyment. He wants to enjoy sense
gratification. For sense gratification, a man in the mode of passion wants some
honor in society, or in the nation, and he wants to have a happy family, with
nice children, wife and house. These are the products of the mode of passion.
As  long  as  one  is  hankering  after  these  things,  he  has  to  work  very  hard.
Therefore it is clearly stated here that he becomes associated with the fruits of
his activities and thus becomes bound by such activities. In order to please his
wife,  children  and  society  and  to  keep  up  his  prestige,  one  has  to  work.
Therefore,  the  whole  material  world  is  more  or  less  in  the  mode  of  passion.
Modern civilization is considered to be advanced in the standard of the mode
of passion. Formerly, the advanced condition was considered to be in the mode
of goodness. If there is no liberation for those in the mode of goodness, what to
speak of those who are entangled in the mode of passion?

TEXT  8

TaMaSTvjaNaJa& iviÖ MaaehNa& SavRdeihNaaMa( )

Pa[Maadal/SYaiNad]ai>aSTaiàbDNaaiTa >aarTa )) 8 ))

tamas tv ajïäna-jaà viddhi
mohanaà sarva-dehinäm
pramädälasya-nidräbhis
tan nibadhnäti bhärata

SYNONYMS

tamaù—the mode of ignorance; tu—but; ajïäna-jam—produced of ignorance;
viddhi—know; mohanam—the delusion; sarva-dehinäm—of all embodied
beings; pramäda—with madness; älasya—indolence; nidräbhiù—and sleep;
tat—that; nibadhnäti—binds; bhärata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O son of Bharata, know that the mode of darkness, born of ignorance, is the

delusion of all embodied living entities. The results of this mode are madness,
indolence and sleep, which bind the conditioned soul.

PURPORT

In this verse the specific application of the word tu is very significant. This
means  that  the  mode  of  ignorance  is  a  very  peculiar  qualification  of  the
embodied  soul.  The  mode  of  ignorance  is  just  the  opposite  of  the  mode  of
goodness.  In  the  mode  of  goodness,  by  development  of  knowledge,  one  can
understand  what  is  what,  but  the  mode  of  ignorance  is  just  the  opposite.
Everyone  under  the  spell  of  the  mode  of  ignorance  becomes  mad,  and  a
madman  cannot  understand  what  is  what.  Instead  of  making  advancement,
one  becomes  degraded.  The  definition  of  the  mode  of  ignorance  is  stated  in

the  Vedic  literature.  Vastu-yäthätmya-jïänävarakaà  viparyaya-jïäna-janakaà
tamaù: under the spell of ignorance, one cannot understand a thing as it is. For
example, everyone can see that his grandfather has died and therefore he will
also die; man is mortal. The children that he conceives will also die. So death is
sure.  Still,  people  are  madly  accumulating  money  and  working  very  hard  all
day  and  night,  not  caring  for  the  eternal  spirit.  This  is  madness.  In  their
madness,  they  are  very  reluctant  to  make  advancement 
in  spiritual
understanding. Such people are very lazy. When they are invited to associate
for spiritual understanding, they are not much interested. They are not even
active  like  the  man  who  is  controlled  by  the  mode  of  passion.  Thus  another
symptom  of  one  embedded  in  the  mode  of  ignorance  is  that  he  sleeps  more
than  is  required.  Six  hours  of  sleep  is  sufficient,  but  a  man  in  the  mode  of
ignorance sleeps at least ten or twelve hours a day. Such a man appears to be
always  dejected  and  is  addicted  to  intoxicants  and  sleeping.  These  are  the
symptoms of a person conditioned by the mode of ignorance.

TEXT  9

Satv& Sau%e SaÅYaiTa rJa" k-MaRi<a >aarTa )

jaNaMaav*TYa Tau TaMa" Pa[Maade SaÅYaTYauTa )) 9 ))

sattvaà sukhe saïjayati
rajaù karmaëi bhärata
jïänam ävåtya tu tamaù
pramäde saïjayaty uta

SYNONYMS

sattvam—the mode of goodness; sukhe—in happiness; saïjayati—binds;
rajaù—the mode of passion; karmaëi—in fruitive activity; bhärata—O son of
Bharata; jïänam—knowledge; ävåtya—covering; tu—but; tamaù—the mode of
ignorance; pramäde—in madness; saïjayati—binds; uta—it is said.

TRANSLATION

O son of Bharata, the mode of goodness conditions one to happiness; passion

conditions one to fruitive action; and ignorance, covering one’s knowledge,
binds one to madness.

PURPORT

A  person  in  the  mode  of  goodness  is  satisfied  by  his  work  or  intellectual
pursuit,  just  as  a  philosopher,  scientist  or  educator  may  be  engaged  in  a
particular field of knowledge and may be satisfied in that way. A man in the
mode of passion may be engaged in fruitive activity; he owns as much as he can
and  spends  for  good  causes.  Sometimes  he  tries  to  open  hospitals,  give  to
charity  institutions,  etc.  These  are  signs  of  one  in  the  mode  of  passion.  And
the mode of ignorance covers knowledge. In the mode of ignorance, whatever
one does is good neither for him nor for anyone.

TEXT  10

rJaSTaMaêai>a>aUYa Satv& >aviTa >aarTa )

rJa" Satv& TaMaêEv TaMa" Satv& rJaSTaQaa )) 10 ))

rajas tamaç cäbhibhüya
sattvaà bhavati bhärata
rajaù sattvaà tamaç caiva
tamaù sattvaà rajas tathä

SYNONYMS

rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; ca—also;
abhibhüya—surpassing; sattvam—the mode of goodness; bhavati—becomes
prominent; bhärata—O son of Bharata; rajaù—the mode of passion;
sattvam—the mode of goodness; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; ca—also;

eva—like that; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; sattvam—the mode of
goodness; rajaù—the mode of passion; tathä—thus.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the mode of goodness becomes prominent, defeating the modes of
passion and ignorance, O son of Bharata. Sometimes the mode of passion defeats
goodness and ignorance, and at other times ignorance defeats goodness and
passion. In this way there is always competition for supremacy.

PURPORT

When  the  mode  of  passion  is  prominent,  the  modes  of  goodness  and
ignorance are defeated. When the mode of goodness is prominent, passion and
ignorance  are  defeated.  And  when  the  mode  of  ignorance  is  prominent,
passion  and  goodness  are  defeated.  This  competition  is  always  going  on.
Therefore, one who is actually intent on advancing in Kåñëa consciousness has
to  transcend  these  three  modes.  The  prominence  of  some  certain  mode  of
nature is manifested in one’s dealings, in his activities, in eating, etc. All this
will  be  explained  in  later  chapters.  But  if  one  wants,  he  can  develop,  by
practice,  the  mode  of  goodness  and  thus  defeat  the  modes  of  ignorance  and
passion.  One  can  similarly  develop  the  mode  of  passion  and  defeat  goodness
and ignorance. Or one can develop the mode of ignorance and defeat goodness
and passion. Although there are these three modes of material nature, if one is
determined  he  can  be  blessed  by  the  mode  of  goodness,  and  by  transcending
the mode of goodness he can be situated in pure goodness, which is called the
vasudeva state, a state in which one can understand the science of God. By the
manifestation  of  particular  activities,  it  can  be  understood  in  what  mode  of
nature one is situated.

TEXT  11

SavRÜarezu dehe_iSMaNPa[k-aXa oPaJaaYaTae )

jaNa& Yada Tada ivÛaiÜv*Ö& SatviMaTYauTa )) 11 ))

sarva-dväreñu dehe ’smin
prakäça upajäyate
jïänaà yadä tadä vidyäd
vivåddhaà sattvam ity uta

SYNONYMS

sarva-dväreñu—in all the gates; dehe asmin—in this body; prakäçaù—the
quality of illumination; upajäyate—develops; jïänam—knowledge;
yadä—when; tadä—at that time; vidyät—know; vivåddham—increased;
sattvam—the mode of goodness; iti uta—thus it is said.

TRANSLATION

The manifestations of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all the

gates of the body are illuminated by knowledge.

PURPORT

There  are  nine  gates  in  the  body:  two  eyes,  two  ears,  two  nostrils,  the
mouth,  the  genitals  and  the  anus.  When  every  gate  is  illuminated  by  the
symptoms  of  goodness,  it  should  be  understood  that  one  has  developed  the
mode  of  goodness.  In  the  mode  of  goodness,  one  can  see  things  in  the  right
position, one can hear things in the right position, and one can taste things in
the  right  position.  One  becomes  cleansed  inside  and  outside.  In  every  gate
there is development of the symptoms of happiness, and that is the position of
goodness.

TEXT  12

l/ae>a" Pa[v*itararM>a" k-MaR<aaMaXaMa" SPa*ha )

rJaSYaeTaaiNa JaaYaNTae ivv*Öe >arTazR>a )) 12 ))

lobhaù pravåttir ärambhaù
karmaëäm açamaù spåhä
rajasy etäni jäyante
vivåddhe bharatarñabha

SYNONYMS

lobhaù—greed; pravåttiù—activity; ärambhaù—endeavor; karmaëäm—in
activities; açamaù—uncontrollable; spåhä—desire; rajasi—of the mode of
passion; etäni—all these; jäyante—develop; vivåddhe—when there is an excess;
bharata-åñabha—O chief of the descendants of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O chief of the Bhäratas, when there is an increase in the mode of passion the

symptoms of great attachment, fruitive activity, intense endeavor, and
uncontrollable desire and hankering develop.

PURPORT

One  in  the  mode  of  passion  is  never  satisfied  with  the  position  he  has
already acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants to construct a
residential  house,  he  tries  his  best  to  have  a  palatial  house,  as  if  he  would  be
able to reside in that house eternally. And he develops a great hankering for
sense gratification. There is no end to sense gratification. He always wants to
remain with his family and in his house and to continue the process of sense
gratification.  There  is  no  cessation  of  this.  All  these  symptoms  should  be
understood as characteristic of the mode of passion.

TEXT  13

APa[k-aXaae_Pa[v*itaê Pa[Maadae Maaeh Wv c )

TaMaSYaeTaaiNa JaaYaNTae ivv*Öe ku-åNaNdNa )) 13 ))

aprakäço ’pravåttiç ca
pramädo moha eva ca
tamasy etäni jäyante
vivåddhe kuru-nandana

SYNONYMS

aprakäçaù—darkness; apravåttiù—inactivity; ca—and; pramädaù—madness;
mohaù—illusion; eva—certainly; ca—also; tamasi—the mode of ignorance;
etäni—these; jäyante—are manifested; vivåddhe—when developed;
kuru-nandana—O son of Kuru.

TRANSLATION

When there is an increase in the mode of ignorance, O son of Kuru,

darkness, inertia, madness and illusion are manifested.

PURPORT

When  there  is  no  illumination,  knowledge  is  absent.  One  in  the  mode  of
ignorance does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to act whimsically,
for  no  purpose.  Even  though  he  has  the  capacity  to  work,  he  makes  no
endeavor.  This  is  called  illusion.  Although  consciousness  is  going  on,  life  is
inactive. These are the symptoms of one in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT  14

Yada Satve Pa[v*Öe Tau Pa[l/Ya& YaaiTa deh>a*Ta( )

TadaetaMaivda& l/aek-aNaMal/aNPa[iTaPaÛTae )) 14 ))

yadä sattve pravåddhe tu
pralayaà yäti deha-bhåt

tadottama-vidäà lokän
amalän pratipadyate

SYNONYMS

yadä—when; sattve—the mode of goodness; pravåddhe—developed; tu—but;
pralayam—dissolution; yäti—goes; deha-bhåt—the embodied; tadä—at that
time; uttama-vidäm—of the great sages; lokän—the planets; amalän—pure;
pratipadyate—attains.

TRANSLATION

When one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher planets

of the great sages.

PURPORT

One  in  goodness  attains  higher  planetary  systems,  like  Brahmaloka  or
Janoloka, and there enjoys godly happiness. The word amalän is significant; it
means “free from the modes of passion and ignorance.” There are impurities in
the material world, but the mode of goodness is the purest form of existence in
the material world. There are different kinds of planets for different kinds of
living  entities.  Those  who  die  in  the  mode  of  goodness  are  elevated  to  the
planets where great sages and great devotees live.

TEXT  15

rJaiSa Pa[l/Ya& GaTva k-MaRSai®zu JaaYaTae )

TaQaa Pa[l/INaSTaMaiSa MaU!YaaeiNazu JaaYaTae )) 15 ))

rajasi pralayaà gatvä
karma-saìgiñu jäyate
tathä pralénas tamasi
müòha-yoniñu jäyate

SYNONYMS

rajasi—in passion; pralayam—dissolution; gatvä—attaining;
karma-saìgiñu—in the association of those engaged in fruitive activities;
jäyate—takes birth; tathä—similarly; pralénaù—being dissolved; tamasi—in
ignorance; müòha-yoniñu—in animal species; jäyate—takes birth.

TRANSLATION

When one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those engaged

in fruitive activities; and when one dies in the mode of ignorance, he takes
birth in the animal kingdom.

PURPORT

Some people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform
of  human  life  it  never  goes  down  again.  This  is  incorrect.  According  to  this
verse, if one develops the mode of ignorance, after his death he is degraded to
an  animal  form  of  life.  From  there  one  has  to  again  elevate  himself,  by  an
evolutionary  process,  to  come  again  to  the  human  form  of  life.  Therefore,
those  who  are  actually  serious  about  human  life  should  take  to  the  mode  of
goodness and in good association transcend the modes and become situated in
Kåñëa  consciousness.  This  is  the  aim  of  human  life.  Otherwise,  there  is  no
guarantee that the human being will again attain to the human status.

TEXT  16

k-MaR<a" Sauk*-TaSYaahu" Saaitvk&- iNaMaRl&/ f-l/Ma( )

rJaSaSTau f-l&/ du"%MajaNa& TaMaSa" f-l/Ma( )) 16 ))

karmaëaù sukåtasyähuù
sättvikaà nirmalaà phalam
rajasas tu phalaà duùkham

ajïänaà tamasaù phalam

SYNONYMS

karmaëaù—of work; su-kåtasya—pious; ähuù—is said; sättvikam—in the mode
of goodness; nirmalam—purified; phalam—the result; rajasaù—of the mode of
passion; tu—but; phalam—the result; duùkham—misery; ajïänam—nonsense;
tamasaù—of the mode of ignorance; phalam—the result.

TRANSLATION

The result of pious action is pure and is said to be in the mode of goodness.
But action done in the mode of passion results in misery, and action performed
in the mode of ignorance results in foolishness.

PURPORT

The result of pious activities in the mode of goodness is pure. Therefore the
sages, who are free from all illusion, are situated in happiness. But activities in
the mode of passion are simply miserable. Any activity for material happiness
is  bound  to  be  defeated.  If,  for  example,  one  wants  to  have  a  skyscraper,  so
much human misery has to be undergone before a big skyscraper can be built.
The  financier  has  to  take  much  trouble  to  earn  a  mass  of  wealth,  and  those
who  are  slaving  to  construct  the  building  have  to  render  physical  toil.  The
miseries  are  there.  Thus  Bhagavad-gétä  says  that  in  any  activity  performed
under the spell of the mode of passion, there is definitely great misery. There
may  be  a  little  so-called  mental  happiness—“I  have  this  house  or  this
money”—but this is not actual happiness.

As  far  as  the  mode  of  ignorance  is  concerned,  the  performer  is  without
knowledge,  and  therefore  all  his  activities  result  in  present  misery,  and
afterwards  he  will  go  on  toward  animal  life.  Animal  life  is  always  miserable,
although,  under  the  spell  of  the  illusory  energy,  mäyä,  the  animals  do  not
understand  this.  Slaughtering  poor  animals  is  also  due  to  the  mode  of
ignorance. The animal killers do not know that in the future the animal will

have a body suitable to kill them. That is the law of nature. In human society,
if one kills a man he has to be hanged. That is the law of the state. Because of
ignorance, people do not perceive that there is a complete state controlled by
the Supreme Lord. Every living creature is a son of the Supreme Lord, and He
does  not  tolerate  even  an  ant’s  being  killed.  One  has  to  pay  for  it.  So
indulgence in animal killing for the taste of the tongue is the grossest kind of
ignorance.  A  human  being  has  no  need  to  kill  animals,  because  God  has
supplied so many nice things. If one indulges in meat-eating anyway, it is to be
understood that he is acting in ignorance and is making his future very dark.
Of  all  kinds  of  animal  killing,  the  killing  of  cows  is  most  vicious  because  the
cow gives us all kinds of pleasure by supplying milk. Cow slaughter is an act of
the  grossest  type  of  ignorance.  In  the  Vedic  literature  (Åg Veda  9.4.64)  the
words  gobhiù  préëita-matsaram  indicate  that  one  who,  being  fully  satisfied  by
milk, is desirous of killing the cow is in the grossest ignorance. There is also a
prayer in the Vedic literature that states:

namo brahmaëya-deväya
go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca
jagad-dhitäya kåñëäya
govindäya namo namaù

“My Lord, You are the well-wisher of the cows and the brähmaëas, and You
are  the  well-wisher  of  the  entire  human  society  and  world.”  (Viñëu Puräëa
1.19.65)  The  purport  is  that  special  mention  is  given  in  that  prayer  for  the
protection  of  the  cows  and  the  brähmaëas.  Brähmaëas  are  the  symbol  of
spiritual education, and cows are the symbol of the most valuable food; these
two  living  creatures,  the  brähmaëas  and  the  cows,  must  be  given  all
protection—that  is  real  advancement  of  civilization.  In  modern  human
society, spiritual knowledge is neglected, and cow killing is encouraged. It is to
be understood, then, that human society is advancing in the wrong direction
and is clearing the path to its own condemnation. A civilization which guides
the  citizens  to  become  animals  in  their  next  lives  is  certainly  not  a  human
civilization. The present human civilization is, of course, grossly misled by the
modes  of  passion  and  ignorance.  It  is  a  very  dangerous  age,  and  all  nations

should  take  care  to  provide  the  easiest  process,  Kåñëa  consciousness,  to  save
humanity from the greatest danger.

TEXT  17

SatvaTSaÅaYaTae jaNa& rJaSaae l/ae>a Wv c )

Pa[MaadMaaehaE TaMaSaae >avTaae_jaNaMaev c )) 17 ))

sattvät saïjäyate jïänaà
rajaso lobha eva ca
pramäda-mohau tamaso
bhavato ’jïänam eva ca

SYNONYMS

sattvät—from the mode of goodness; saïjäyate—develops;
jïänam—knowledge; rajasaù—from the mode of passion; lobhaù—greed;
eva—certainly; ca—also; pramäda—madness; mohau—and illusion;
tamasaù—from the mode of ignorance; bhavataù—develop;
ajïänam—nonsense; eva—certainly; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of
passion, greed develops; and from the mode of ignorance develop foolishness,
madness and illusion.

PURPORT

Since  the  present  civilization  is  not  very  congenial  to  the  living  entities,
Kåñëa  consciousness  is  recommended.  Through  Kåñëa  consciousness,  society
will develop the mode of goodness. When the mode of goodness is developed,
people will see things as they are. In the mode of ignorance, people are just like
animals and cannot see things clearly. In the mode of ignorance, for example,

they do not see that by killing one animal they are taking the chance of being
killed by the same animal in the next life. Because people have no education in
actual  knowledge,  they  become  irresponsible.  To  stop  this  irresponsibility,
education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in general must
be there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness, they will
become  sober,  in  full  knowledge  of  things  as  they  are.  Then  people  will  be
happy  and  prosperous.  Even  if  the  majority  of  the  people  aren’t  happy  and
prosperous,  if  a  certain  percentage  of  the  population  develops  Kåñëa
consciousness and becomes situated in the mode of goodness, then there is the
possibility for peace and prosperity all over the world. Otherwise, if the world
is  devoted  to  the  modes  of  passion  and  ignorance,  there  can  be  no  peace  or
prosperity. In the mode of passion, people become greedy, and their hankering
for  sense  enjoyment  has  no  limit.  One  can  see  that  even  if  one  has  enough
money  and  adequate  arrangements  for  sense  gratification,  there  is  neither
happiness  nor  peace  of  mind.  That  is  not  possible,  because  one  is  situated  in
the mode of passion. If one wants happiness at all, his money will not help him;
he  has  to  elevate  himself  to  the  mode  of  goodness  by  practicing  Kåñëa
consciousness.  When  one  is  engaged  in  the  mode  of  passion,  not  only  is  he
mentally  unhappy,  but  his  profession  and  occupation  are  also  very
troublesome.  He  has  to  devise  so  many  plans  and  schemes  to  acquire  enough
money  to  maintain  his  status  quo.  This  is  all  miserable.  In  the  mode  of
ignorance,  people  become  mad.  Being  distressed  by  their  circumstances,  they
take shelter of intoxication, and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their
future in life is very dark.

TEXT

 18

Oß| GaC^iNTa SatvSQaa MaDYae iTaïiNTa raJaSaa" )

JagaNYaGau<av*itaSQaa ADaae GaC^iNTa TaaMaSaa" )) 18 ))

ürdhvaà gacchanti sattva-sthä
madhye tiñöhanti räjasäù
jaghanya-guëa-våtti-sthä

adho gacchanti tämasäù

SYNONYMS

ürdhvam—upwards; gacchanti—go; sattva-sthäù—those situated in the mode of
goodness; madhye—in the middle; tiñöhanti—dwell; räjasäù—those situated in
the mode of passion; jaghanya—of abominable; guëa—quality;
våtti-sthäù—whose occupation; adhaù—down; gacchanti—go;
tämasäù—persons in the mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher
planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those in
the abominable mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  the  results  of  actions  in  the  three  modes  of  nature  are  more
explicitly  set  forth.  There  is  an  upper  planetary  system,  consisting  of  the
heavenly planets, where everyone is highly elevated. According to the degree
of development of the mode of goodness, the living entity can be transferred to
various planets in this system. The highest planet is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka,
where the prime person of this universe, Lord Brahmä, resides. We have seen
already  that  we  can  hardly  calculate  the  wondrous  condition  of  life  in
Brahmaloka, but the highest condition of life, the mode of goodness, can bring
us to this.

The  mode  of  passion  is  mixed.  It  is  in  the  middle,  between  the  modes  of
goodness and ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if he should be
purely in the mode of passion, he will simply remain on this earth as a king or a
rich man. But because there are mixtures, one can also go down. People on this
earth,  in  the  mode  of  passion  or  ignorance,  cannot  forcibly  approach  the
higher planets by machine. In the mode of passion, there is also the chance of
becoming mad in the next life.

The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here as abominable.
The result of developing ignorance is very, very risky. It is the lowest quality in
material  nature.  Beneath  the  human  level  there  are  eight  million  species  of
life—birds,  beasts,  reptiles,  trees,  etc.—and  according  to  the  development  of
the  mode  of  ignorance,  people  are  brought  down  to  these  abominable
conditions.  The  word  tämasäù  is  very  significant  here.  Tämasäù  indicates
those  who  stay  continuously  in  the  mode  of  ignorance  without  rising  to  a
higher mode. Their future is very dark.

There is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passion to
be  elevated  to  the  mode  of  goodness,  and  that  system  is  called  Kåñëa
consciousness.  But  one  who  does  not  take  advantage  of  this  opportunity  will
certainly continue in the lower modes.

TEXT  19

NaaNYa& Gau<ae>Ya" k-TaaRr& Yada d]íaNauPaXYaiTa )

Gau<ae>Yaê Par& veita MaÙav& Saae_iDaGaC^iTa )) 19 ))

nänyaà guëebhyaù kartäraà
yadä drañöänupaçyati
guëebhyaç ca paraà vetti
mad-bhävaà so ’dhigacchati

SYNONYMS

na—no; anyam—other; guëebhyaù—than the qualities; kartäram—performer;
yadä—when; drañöä—a seer; anupaçyati—sees properly; guëebhyaù—to the
modes of nature; ca—and; param—transcendental; vetti—knows;
mat-bhävam—to My spiritual nature; saù—he; adhigacchati—is promoted.

TRANSLATION

When one properly sees that in all activities no other performer is at work

than these modes of nature and he knows the Supreme Lord, who is

transcendental to all these modes, he attains My spiritual nature.

PURPORT

One can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature simply
by  understanding  them  properly  by  learning  from  the  proper  souls.  The  real
spiritual  master  is  Kåñëa,  and  He  is  imparting  this  spiritual  knowledge  to
Arjuna.  Similarly,  it  is  from  those  who  are  fully  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  that
one  has  to  learn  this  science  of  activities  in  terms  of  the  modes  of  nature.
Otherwise,  one’s  life  will  be  misdirected.  By  the  instruction  of  a  bona  fide
spiritual master, a living entity can know of his spiritual position, his material
body,  his  senses,  how  he  is  entrapped,  and  how  he  is  under  the  spell  of  the
material modes of nature. He is helpless, being in the grip of these modes, but
when  he  can  see  his  real  position,  then  he  can  attain  to  the  transcendental
platform,  having  the  scope  for  spiritual  life.  Actually,  the  living  entity  is  not
the performer of different activities. He is forced to act because he is situated
in  a  particular  type  of  body,  conducted  by  some  particular  mode  of  material
nature. Unless one has the help of spiritual authority, he cannot understand in
what  position  he  is  actually  situated.  With  the  association  of  a  bona  fide
spiritual master, he can see his real position, and by such an understanding he
can become fixed in full Kåñëa consciousness. A man in Kåñëa consciousness is
not controlled by the spell of the material modes of nature. It has already been
stated  in  the  Seventh  Chapter  that  one  who  has  surrendered  to  Kåñëa  is
relieved  from  the  activities  of  material  nature.  For  one  who  is  able  to  see
things as they are, the influence of material nature gradually ceases.

TEXT  20

Gau<aaNaeTaaNaTaqTYa }aqNdehq dehSaMauÙvaNa( )

JaNMaMa*TYauJaradu"%EivRMau¢-ae_Ma*TaMaénuTae )) 20 ))

guëän etän atétya trén
dehé deha-samudbhavän

janma-måtyu-jarä-duùkhair
vimukto ’måtam açnute

SYNONYMS

guëän—qualities; etän—all these; atétya—transcending; trén—three;
dehé—the embodied; deha—the body; samudbhavän—produced of; janma—of
birth; måtyu—death; jarä—and old age; duùkhaiù—the distresses;
vimuktaù—being freed from; amåtam—nectar; açnute—he enjoys.

TRANSLATION

When the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes associated
with the material body, he can become free from birth, death, old age and their
distresses and can enjoy nectar even in this life.

PURPORT

How one can stay in the transcendental position, even in this body, in full
Kåñëa consciousness, is explained in this verse. The Sanskrit word dehé means
“embodied.” Although one is within this material body, by his advancement in
spiritual knowledge he can be free from the influence of the modes of nature.
He  can  enjoy  the  happiness  of  spiritual  life  even  in  this  body  because,  after
leaving  this  body,  he  is  certainly  going  to  the  spiritual  sky.  But  even  in  this
body  he  can  enjoy  spiritual  happiness.  In  other  words,  devotional  service  in
Kåñëa consciousness is the sign of liberation from material entanglement, and
this will be explained in the Eighteenth Chapter. When one is freed from the
influence of the modes of material nature, he enters into devotional service.

TEXT

 21

AJauRNa ovac )

kE-ilR/®EñqNGau<aaNaeTaaNaTaqTaae >aviTa Pa[>aae )

ik-Maacar" k-Qa& cETaa&ñqNGau<aaNaiTavTaRTae )) 21 ))

arjuna uväca
kair liìgais trén guëän etän
atéto bhavati prabho
kim äcäraù kathaà caitäàs
trén guëän ativartate

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; kaiù—by which; liìgaiù—symptoms; trén—three;
guëän—qualities; etän—all these; atétaù—having transcended; bhavati—is;
prabho—O my Lord; kim—what; äcäraù—behavior; katham—how; ca—also;
etän—these; trén—three; guëän—qualities; ativartate—transcends.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O my dear Lord, by which symptoms is one known who is

transcendental to these three modes? What is his behavior? And how does he
transcend the modes of nature?

PURPORT

In this verse, Arjuna’s questions are very appropriate. He wants to know the
symptoms  of  a  person  who  has  already  transcended  the  material  modes.  He
first inquires of the symptoms of such a transcendental person. How can one
understand  that  he  has  already  transcended  the  influence  of  the  modes  of
material nature? The second question asks how he lives and what his activities
are. Are they regulated or nonregulated? Then Arjuna inquires of the means
by  which  he  can  attain  the  transcendental  nature.  That  is  very  important.
Unless  one  knows  the  direct  means  by  which  one  can  be  situated  always
transcendentally, there is no possibility of showing the symptoms. So all these
questions put by Arjuna are very important, and the Lord answers them.

TEXTS  22–25

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

Pa[k-aXa& c Pa[v*ita& c MaaehMaev c Paa<@v )

Na Üeií SaMPa[v*taaiNa Na iNav*taaiNa k-ax(+aiTa )) 22 ))

odaSaqNavdaSaqNaae Gau<aEYaaeR Na ivcaLYaTae )

Gau<aa vTaRNTa wTYaev& Yaae_viTaïiTa Nae®Tae )) 23 ))

SaMadu"%Sau%" SvSQa" SaMal/aeíaXMak-aÄNa" )

TauLYaiPa[YaaiPa[Yaae DaqrSTauLYaiNaNdaTMaSa&STauiTa" )) 24 ))

MaaNaaPaMaaNaYaaeSTauLYaSTauLYaae iMa}aairPa+aYaae" )

SavaRrM>aPairTYaaGaq Gau<aaTaqTa" Sa oCYaTae )) 25 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
prakäçaà ca pravåttià ca
moham eva ca päëòava
na dveñöi sampravåttäni
na nivåttäni käìkñati

udäséna-vad äséno
guëair yo na vicälyate
guëä vartanta ity evaà
yo ’vatiñöhati neìgate

sama-duùkha-sukhaù sva-sthaù
sama-loñöäçma-käïcanaù
tulya-priyäpriyo dhéras
tulya-nindätma-saàstutiù

mänäpamänayos tulyas
tulyo miträri-pakñayoù
sarvärambha-parityägé
guëätétaù sa ucyate

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
prakäçam—illumination; ca—and; pravåttim—attachment; ca—and;
moham—illusion; eva ca—also; päëòava—O son of Päëòu; na dveñöi—does not
hate; sampravåttäni—although developed; na nivåttäni—nor stopping
development; käìkñati—desires; udäséna-vat—as if neutral; äsénaù—situated;
guëaiù—by the qualities; yaù—one who; na—never; vicälyate—is agitated;
guëäù—the qualities; vartante—are acting; iti evam—knowing thus; yaù—one
who; avatiñöhati—remains; na—never; iìgate—flickers; sama—equal;
duùkha—in distress; sukhaù—and happiness; sva-sthaù—being situated in
himself; sama—equally; loñöa—a lump of earth; açma—stone; käïcanaù—gold;
tulya—equally disposed; priya—to the dear; apriyaù—and the undesirable;
dhéraù—steady; tulya—equal; nindä—in defamation; ätma-saàstutiù—and
praise of himself; mäna—in honor; apamänayoù—and dishonor;
tulyaù—equal; tulyaù—equal; mitra—of friends; ari—and enemies;
pakñayoù—to the parties; sarva—of all; ärambha—endeavors;
parityägé—renouncer; guëa-atétaù—transcendental to the material modes of
nature; saù—he; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O son of Päëòu, he who does not

hate illumination, attachment and delusion when they are present or long for
them when they disappear; who is unwavering and undisturbed through all
these reactions of the material qualities, remaining neutral and transcendental,
knowing that the modes alone are active; who is situated in the self and regards
alike happiness and distress; who looks upon a lump of earth, a stone and a
piece of gold with an equal eye; who is equal toward the desirable and the
undesirable; who is steady, situated equally well in praise and blame, honor and
dishonor; who treats alike both friend and enemy; and who has renounced all
material activities—such a person is said to have transcended the modes of
nature.

PURPORT

Arjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them one
after  another.  In  these  verses,  Kåñëa  first 
indicates  that  a  person
transcendentally  situated  has  no  envy  and  does  not  hanker  for  anything.
When  a  living  entity  stays  in  this  material  world  embodied  by  the  material
body,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  he  is  under  the  control  of  one  of  the  three
modes of material nature. When he is actually out of the body, then he is out
of the clutches of the material modes of nature. But as long as he is not out of
the  material  body,  he  should  be  neutral.  He  should  engage  himself  in  the
devotional service of the Lord so that his identity with the material body will
automatically  be  forgotten.  When  one  is  conscious  of  the  material  body,  he
acts  only  for  sense  gratification,  but  when  one  transfers  the  consciousness  to
Kåñëa, sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need this material
body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of the material body. The
qualities of the material modes in the body will act, but as spirit soul the self is
aloof  from  such  activities.  How  does  he  become  aloof?  He  does  not  desire  to
enjoy  the  body,  nor  does  he  desire  to  get  out  of  it.  Thus  transcendentally
situated,  the  devotee  becomes  automatically  free.  He  need  not  try  to  become
free from the influence of the modes of material nature.

The  next  question  concerns  the  dealings  of  a  transcendentally  situated
person.  The  materially  situated  person  is  affected  by  so-called  honor  and
dishonor  offered  to  the  body,  but  the  transcendentally  situated  person  is  not
affected  by  such  false  honor  and  dishonor.  He  performs  his  duty  in  Kåñëa
consciousness and does not mind whether a man honors or dishonors him. He
accepts things that are favorable for his duty in Kåñëa consciousness, otherwise
he  has  no  necessity  of  anything  material,  either  a  stone  or  gold.  He  takes
everyone  as  his  dear  friend  who  helps  him  in  his  execution  of  Kåñëa
consciousness, and he does not hate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed
and sees everything on an equal level because he knows perfectly well that he
has  nothing  to  do  with  material  existence.  Social  and  political  issues  do  not
affect  him,  because  he  knows  the  situation  of  temporary  upheavals  and
disturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He can attempt

anything for Kåñëa, but for his personal self he does not attempt anything. By
such behavior one becomes actually transcendentally situated.

TEXT  26

Maa& c Yaae_VYai>acare<a >ai¢-YaaeGaeNa SaevTae )

Sa Gau<aaNSaMaTaqTYaETaaNb]ø>aUYaaYa k-LPaTae )) 26 ))

mäà ca yo ’vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate

SYNONYMS

mäm—unto Me; ca—also; yaù—a person who; avyabhicäreëa—without fail;
bhakti-yogena—by devotional service; sevate—renders service; saù—he;
guëän—the modes of material nature; samatétya—transcending; etän—all
these; brahma-bhüyäya—elevated to the Brahman platform; kalpate—becomes.

TRANSLATION

One who engages in full devotional service, unfailing in all circumstances, at

once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of
Brahman.

PURPORT

This  verse  is  a  reply  to  Arjuna’s  third  question:  What  is  the  means  of
attaining  to  the  transcendental  position?  As  explained  before,  the  material
world is acting under the spell of the modes of material nature. One should not
be  disturbed  by  the  activities  of  the  modes  of  nature;  instead  of  putting  his
consciousness into such activities, he may transfer his consciousness to Kåñëa
activities. Kåñëa activities are known as bhakti-yoga—always acting for Kåñëa.

This  includes  not  only  Kåñëa,  but  His  different  plenary  expansions  such  as
Räma and Näräyaëa. He has innumerable expansions. One who is engaged in
the  service  of  any  of  the  forms  of  Kåñëa,  or  of  His  plenary  expansions,  is
considered  to  be  transcendentally  situated.  One  should  also  note  that  all  the
forms of Kåñëa are fully transcendental, blissful, full of knowledge and eternal.
Such  personalities  of  Godhead  are  omnipotent  and  omniscient,  and  they
possess all transcendental qualities. So if one engages himself in the service of
Kåñëa or His plenary expansions with unfailing determination, although these
modes  of  material  nature  are  very  difficult  to  overcome,  one  can  overcome
them  easily.  This  has  already  been  explained  in  the  Seventh  Chapter.  One
who  surrenders  unto  Kåñëa  at  once  surmounts  the  influence  of  the  modes  of
material nature. To be in Kåñëa consciousness or in devotional service means
to  acquire  equality  with  Kåñëa.  The  Lord  says  that  His  nature  is  eternal,
blissful and full of knowledge, and the living entities are part and parcel of the
Supreme, as gold particles are part of a gold mine. Thus the living entity, in his
spiritual position, is as good as gold, as good as Kåñëa in quality. The difference
of  individuality  continues,  otherwise  there  would  be  no  question  of
bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means that the Lord is there, the devotee is there and
the  activity  of  exchange  of  love  between  the  Lord  and  the  devotee  is  there.
Therefore  the  individuality  of  two  persons  is  present  in  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  and  the  individual  person,  otherwise  there  would  be
no  meaning  to  bhakti-yoga.  If  one  is  not  situated  in  the  same  transcendental
position with the Lord, one cannot serve the Supreme Lord. To be a personal
assistant to a king, one must acquire the qualifications. Thus the qualification
is  to  become  Brahman,  or  freed  from  all  material contamination. It is said in
the Vedic literature, brahmaiva san brahmäpy eti. One can attain the Supreme
Brahman  by  becoming  Brahman.  This  means  that  one  must  qualitatively
become one with Brahman. By attainment of Brahman, one does not lose his
eternal Brahman identity as an individual soul.

TEXT  27

b]ø<aae ih Pa[iTaïahMaMa*TaSYaaVYaYaSYa c )

XaaìTaSYa c DaMaRSYa Sau%SYaEk-aiNTak-SYa c )) 27 ))

brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham
amåtasyävyayasya ca
çäçvatasya ca dharmasya
sukhasyaikäntikasya ca

SYNONYMS

brahmaëaù—of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi—certainly; pratiñöhä—the rest;
aham—I am; amåtasya—of the immortal; avyayasya—of the imperishable;
ca—also; çäçvatasya—of the eternal; ca—and; dharmasya—of the
constitutional position; sukhasya—of happiness; aikäntikasya—ultimate;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

And I am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is immortal,
imperishable and eternal and is the constitutional position of ultimate
happiness.

PURPORT

is 

The constitution of Brahman is immortality, imperishability, eternity, and
happiness.  Brahman 
transcendental  realization.
the  beginning  of 
Paramätmä,  the  Supersoul,  is  the  middle,  the  second  stage  in  transcendental
realization, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate realization
of  the  Absolute  Truth.  Therefore,  both  Paramätmä  and  the  impersonal
Brahman  are  within  the  Supreme  Person.  It  is  explained  in  the  Seventh
Chapter that material nature is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the
Supreme  Lord.  The  Lord  impregnates  the  inferior,  material  nature  with
fragments of the superior nature, and that is the spiritual touch in the material
nature.  When  a  living  entity  conditioned  by  this  material  nature  begins  the
cultivation  of  spiritual  knowledge,  he  elevates  himself  from  the  position  of

material  existence  and  gradually  rises  up  to  the  Brahman  conception  of  the
Supreme. This attainment of the Brahman conception of life is the first stage
in self-realization. At this stage the Brahman-realized person is transcendental
to the material position, but he is not actually perfect in Brahman realization.
If  he  wants,  he  can  continue  to  stay  in  the  Brahman  position  and  then
gradually  rise  up  to  Paramätmä  realization  and  then  to  the  realization  of  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  There  are  many  examples  of  this  in  Vedic
literature.  The  four  Kumäras  were  situated  first  in  the  impersonal  Brahman
conception of truth, but then they gradually rose to the platform of devotional
service. One who cannot elevate himself beyond the impersonal conception of
Brahman runs the risk of falling down. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is stated that
although a person may rise to the stage of impersonal Brahman, without going
further,  with  no  information  of  the  Supreme  Person,  his  intelligence  is  not
perfectly  clear.  Therefore,  in  spite  of  being  raised  to  the  Brahman  platform,
there  is  the  chance  of  falling  down  if  one  is  not  engaged  in  the  devotional
service of the Lord. In the Vedic language it is also said, raso vai saù, rasaà hy
eväyaà  labdhvänandé  bhavati:  “When  one  understands  the  Personality  of
Godhead, 
reservoir  of  pleasure,  Kåñëa,  he  actually  becomes
transcendentally blissful.” (Taittiréya Upaniñad 2.7.1) The Supreme Lord is full
in six opulences, and when a devotee approaches Him there is an exchange of
these  six  opulences.  The  servant  of  the  king  enjoys  on  an  almost  equal  level
with the king. And so eternal happiness, imperishable happiness, and eternal
life  accompany  devotional  service.  Therefore,  realization  of  Brahman,  or
eternity,  or  imperishability,  is  included  in  devotional  service.  This  is  already
possessed by a person who is engaged in devotional service.

the 

The  living  entity,  although  Brahman  by  nature,  has  the  desire  to  lord  it
over  the  material  world,  and  due  to  this  he  falls  down.  In  his  constitutional
position,  a  living  entity  is  above  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  but
association  with  material  nature  entangles  him  in  the  different  modes  of
material  nature—goodness,  passion  and  ignorance.  Due  to  the  association  of
these  three  modes,  his  desire  to  dominate  the  material  world  is  there.  By
engagement  in  devotional  service  in  full  Kåñëa  consciousness,  he  is
immediately situated in the transcendental position, and his unlawful desire to

control  material  nature  is  removed.  Therefore  the  process  of  devotional
service, beginning with hearing, chanting, remembering—the prescribed nine
methods  for  realizing  devotional  service—should  be  practiced  in  the
association of devotees. Gradually, by such association, by the influence of the
spiritual  master,  one’s  material  desire  to  dominate  is  removed,  and  one
becomes  firmly  situated  in  the  Lord’s  transcendental  loving  service.  This
method is prescribed from the twenty-second to the last verse of this chapter.
Devotional service to the Lord is very simple: one should always engage in the
service of the Lord, should eat the remnants of foodstuffs offered to the Deity,
smell the flowers offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, see the places where the
Lord  had  His  transcendental  pastimes,  read  of  the  different  activities  of  the
Lord,  His  reciprocation  of  love  with  His  devotees,  chant  always  the
transcendental  vibration  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/
Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, and observe the fasting days
commemorating  the  appearances  and  disappearances  of  the  Lord  and  His
devotees. By following such a process one becomes completely detached from
all material activities. One who can thus situate himself in the brahmajyoti or
the  different  varieties  of  the  Brahman  conception  is  equal  to  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead in quality.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourteenth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of the Three Modes of Material Nature.

- CHAPTER 15 -
The Yoga of the Supreme Person

TEXT  1

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

OßRMaUl/MaDa"Xaa%MaìTQa& Pa[ahurVYaYaMa( )

^Nda&iSa YaSYa Pa<aaRiNa YaSTa& ved Sa vedivTa( )) 1 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
ürdhva-mülam adhaù-çäkham
açvatthaà prähur avyayam
chandäàsi yasya parëäni
yas taà veda sa veda-vit

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
ürdhva-mülam—with roots above; adhaù—downwards; çäkham—branches;
açvattham—a banyan tree; prähuù—is said; avyayam—eternal;
chandäàsi—the Vedic hymns; yasya—of which; parëäni—the leaves;
yaù—anyone who; tam—that; veda—knows; saù—he; veda-vit—the knower of
the Vedas.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: It is said that there is an

imperishable banyan tree that has its roots upward and its branches down and
whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. One who knows this tree is the knower of
the Vedas.

PURPORT

After  the  discussion  of  the  importance  of  bhakti-yoga,  one  may  question,
“What  about  the  Vedas?”  It  is  explained  in  this  chapter  that  the  purpose  of
Vedic  study  is  to  understand  Kåñëa.  Therefore  one  who  is  in  Kåñëa
consciousness, who is engaged in devotional service, already knows the Vedas.

The entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyan tree.
For  one  who  is  engaged  in  fruitive  activities,  there  is  no  end  to  the  banyan

tree. He wanders from one branch to another, to another, to another. The tree
of  this  material  world  has  no  end,  and  for  one  who  is  attached  to  this  tree,
there  is  no  possibility  of  liberation.  The  Vedic  hymns,  meant  for  elevating
oneself, are called the leaves of this tree. This tree’s roots grow upward because
they begin from where Brahmä is located, the topmost planet of this universe.
If one can understand this indestructible tree of illusion, then one can get out
of it.

This process of extrication should be understood. In the previous chapters it
has  been  explained  that  there  are  many  processes  by  which  to  get  out  of  the
material entanglement. And, up to the Thirteenth Chapter, we have seen that
devotional  service  to  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  best  way.  Now,  the  basic
principle  of  devotional  service  is  detachment  from  material  activities  and
attachment to the transcendental service of the Lord. The process of breaking
attachment to the material world is discussed in the beginning of this chapter.
The  root  of  this  material  existence  grows  upward.  This  means  that  it  begins
from  the  total  material  substance,  from  the  topmost  planet  of  the  universe.
From  there,  the  whole  universe  is  expanded,  with  so  many  branches,
representing the various planetary systems. The fruits represent the results of
the  living  entities’  activities,  namely,  religion,  economic  development,  sense
gratification and liberation.

Now, there is no ready experience in this world of a tree situated with its
branches down and its roots upward, but there is such a thing. That tree can be
found beside a reservoir of water. We can see that the trees on the bank reflect
upon  the  water  with  their  branches  down  and  roots  up.  In  other  words,  the
tree of this material world is only a reflection of the real tree of the spiritual
world. This reflection of the spiritual world is situated on desire, just as a tree’s
reflection is situated on water. Desire is the cause of things’ being situated in
this  reflected  material  light.  One  who  wants  to  get  out  of  this  material
existence  must  know  this  tree  thoroughly  through  analytical  study.  Then  he
can cut off his relationship with it.

This  tree,  being  the  reflection  of  the  real  tree,  is  an  exact  replica.
Everything is there in the spiritual world. The impersonalists take Brahman to
be  the  root  of  this  material  tree,  and  from  the  root,  according  to  Säìkhya

philosophy,  come  prakåti,  puruña,  then  the  three  guëas,  then  the  five  gross
elements  (païca-mahä-bhüta),  then  the  ten  senses  (daçendriya),  mind,  etc.  In
this way they divide up the whole material world into twenty-four elements. If
Brahman  is  the  center  of  all  manifestations,  then  this  material  world  is  a
manifestation  of  the  center  by  180  degrees,  and  the  other  180  degrees
constitute  the  spiritual  world.  The  material  world  is  the  perverted  reflection,
so  the  spiritual  world  must  have  the  same  variegatedness,  but  in  reality.  The
prakåti  is  the  external  energy  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  and  the  puruña  is  the
Supreme  Lord  Himself,  and  that  is  explained  in  Bhagavad-gétä.  Since  this
manifestation  is  material,  it  is  temporary.  A  reflection  is  temporary,  for  it  is
sometimes  seen  and  sometimes  not  seen.  But  the  origin  from  whence  the
reflection is reflected is eternal. The material reflection of the real tree has to
be cut off. When it is said that a person knows the Vedas, it is assumed that he
knows  how  to  cut  off  attachment  to  this  material  world.  If  one  knows  that
process,  he  actually  knows  the  Vedas.  One  who  is  attracted  by  the  ritualistic
formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the beautiful green leaves of the tree. He
does not exactly know the purpose of the Vedas. The purpose of the Vedas, as
disclosed by the Personality of Godhead Himself, is to cut down this reflected
tree and attain the real tree of the spiritual world.

TEXT  2

ADaêaeß| Pa[Sa*TaaSTaSYa Xaa%a Gau<aPa[v*Öa ivzYaPa[val/a" )

ADaê MaUl/aNYaNauSaNTaTaaiNa k-MaaRNaubNDaqiNa MaNauZYal/aeke- )) 2 ))

adhaç cordhvaà prasåtäs tasya çäkhä
guëa-pravåddhä viñaya-praväläù
adhaç ca müläny anusantatäni
karmänubandhéni manuñya-loke

SYNONYMS

adhaù—downward; ca—and; ürdhvam—upward; prasåtäù—extended;

tasya—its; çäkhäù—branches; guëa—by the modes of material nature;
pravåddhäù—developed; viñaya—sense objects; praväläù—twigs;
adhaù—downward; ca—and; müläni—roots; anusantatäni—extended;
karma—to work; anubandhéni—bound; manuñya-loke—in the world of human
society.

TRANSLATION

The branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the
three modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of the senses. This
tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to the fruitive actions of
human society.

PURPORT

The description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its branches
spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there are variegated manifestations
of living entities—human beings, animals, horses, cows, dogs, cats, etc. These
are situated on the lower parts of the branches, whereas on the upper parts are
higher  forms  of  living  entities:  the  demigods,  Gandharvas  and  many  other
higher species of life. As a tree is nourished by water, so this tree is nourished
by the three modes of material nature. Sometimes we find that a tract of land
is  barren  for  want  of  sufficient  water,  and  sometimes  a  tract  is  very  green;
similarly,  where  particular  modes  of  material  nature  are  proportionately
greater in quantity, the different species of life are manifested accordingly.

The  twigs  of  the  tree  are  considered  to  be  the  sense  objects.  By
development of the different modes of nature we develop different senses, and
by  the  senses  we  enjoy  different  varieties  of  sense  objects.  The  tips  of  the
branches are the senses—the ears, nose, eyes, etc.—which are attached to the
enjoyment of different sense objects. The twigs are sound, form, touch, and so
on—the  sense  objects.  The  subsidiary  roots  are  attachments  and  aversions,
which are byproducts of different varieties of suffering and sense enjoyment.
The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered to develop from these
secondary  roots,  which  spread  in  all  directions.  The  real  root  is  from

Brahmaloka,  and  the  other  roots  are  in  the  human  planetary  systems.  After
one enjoys the results of virtuous activities in the upper planetary systems, he
comes  down  to  this  earth  and  renews  his  karma,  or  fruitive  activities  for
promotion. This planet of human beings is considered the field of activities.

TEXTS

 3–4

Na æPaMaSYaeh TaQaaePal/>YaTae NaaNTaae Na caidNaR c SaMPa[iTaïa )

AìTQaMaeNa& Sauivæ!MaUl/‚ MaSa®Xañe<a d*!eNa i^tva )) 3 ))

TaTa" Pad& TaTPairMaaiGaRTaVYa& YaiSMaNGaTaa Na iNavTaRiNTa >aUYa" )

TaMaev caÛ& Pauåz& Pa[PaÛe YaTa" Pa[v*ita" Pa[Sa*Taa Paura<aq )) 4 ))

na rüpam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nänto na cädir na ca sampratiñöhä
açvattham enaà su-virüòha-mülam
asaìga-çastreëa dåòhena chittvä

tataù padaà tat parimärgitavyaà
yasmin gatä na nivartanti bhüyaù
tam eva cädyaà puruñaà prapadye
yataù pravåttiù prasåtä puräëé

SYNONYMS

na—not; rüpam—the form; asya—of this tree; iha—in this world; tathä—also;
upalabhyate—can be perceived; na—never; antaù—end; na—never; ca—also;
ädiù—beginning; na—never; ca—also; sampratiñöhä—the foundation;
açvattham—banyan tree; enam—this; su-virüòha—strongly; mülam—rooted;
asaìga-çastreëa—by the weapon of detachment; dåòhena—strong;
chittvä—cutting; tataù—thereafter; padam—situation; tat—that;
parimärgitavyam—has to be searched out; yasmin—where; gatäù—going;
na—never; nivartanti—they come back; bhüyaù—again; tam—to Him;
eva—certainly; ca—also; ädyam—original; puruñam—the Personality of
Godhead; prapadye—surrender; yataù—from whom; pravåttiù—the beginning;

prasåtä—extended; puräëi—very old.

TRANSLATION

The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can
understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with
determination one must cut down this strongly rooted tree with the weapon of
detachment. Thereafter, one must seek that place from which, having gone, one
never returns, and there surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead
from whom everything began and from whom everything has extended since
time immemorial.

PURPORT

It  is  now  clearly  stated  that  the  real  form  of  this  banyan  tree  cannot  be
understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, the extension of
the real tree is at the other end. When entangled with the material expansions
of  the  tree,  one  cannot  see  how  far  the  tree  extends,  nor  can  one  see  the
beginning of this tree. Yet one has to find out the cause. “I am the son of my
father,  my  father  is  the  son  of  such-and-such  a  person,  etc.”  By  searching  in
this  way,  one  comes  to  Brahmä,  who  is  generated  by  the  Garbhodakaçäyé
Viñëu.  Finally,  in  this  way,  when  one  reaches  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, that is the end of research work. One has to search out that origin of
this  tree,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  through  the  association  of
persons who are in knowledge of that Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then
by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this false reflection of
reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connection and actually become
situated in the real tree.

The  word  asaìga  is  very  important  in  this  connection  because  the
attachment for sense enjoyment and lording it over the material nature is very
strong. Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion of spiritual science
based  on  authoritative  scriptures,  and  one  must  hear  from  persons  who  are
actually  in  knowledge.  As  a  result  of  such  discussion  in  the  association  of
devotees,  one  comes  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Then  the  first

thing one must do is surrender to Him. The description of that place whence
having  gone  one  never  returns  to  this  false  reflected  tree  is  given  here.  The
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  is  the  original  root  from  whom
everything  has  emanated.  To  gain  favor  of  that  Personality  of  Godhead,  one
has only to surrender, and this is a result of performing devotional service by
hearing, chanting, etc. He is the cause of the extension of the material world.
This  has  already  been  explained  by  the  Lord  Himself.  Ahaà  sarvasya
prabhavaù:  “I  am  the  origin  of  everything.”  Therefore  to  get  out  of  the
entanglement of this strong banyan tree of material life, one must surrender to
Kåñëa.  As  soon  as  one  surrenders  unto  Kåñëa,  one  becomes  detached
automatically from this material extension.

TEXT  5

iNaMaaRNaMaaeha iJaTaSa®daeza ADYaaTMaiNaTYaa iviNav*tak-aMaa" )

ÜNÜEivRMau¢-a" Sau%du"%Sa&jE‚ GaRC^NTYaMaU!a" PadMaVYaYa& TaTa( )) 5 ))

nirmäna-mohä jita-saìga-doñä
adhyätma-nityä vinivåtta-kämäù
dvandvair vimuktäù sukha-duùkha-saàjïair
gacchanty amüòhäù padam avyayaà tat

SYNONYMS

niù—without; mäna—false prestige; mohäù—and illusion; jita—having
conquered; saìga—of association; doñäù—the faults; adhyätma—in spiritual
knowledge; nityäù—in eternity; vinivåtta—disassociated; kämäù—from lust;
dvandvaiù—from the dualities; vimuktäù—liberated; sukha-duùkha—happiness
and distress; saàjïaiù—named; gacchanti—attain; amüòhäù—unbewildered;
padam—situation; avyayam—eternal; tat—that.

TRANSLATION

Those who are free from false prestige, illusion and false association, who

understand the eternal, who are done with material lust, who are freed from the
dualities of happiness and distress, and who, unbewildered, know how to
surrender unto the Supreme Person attain to that eternal kingdom.

PURPORT

The  surrendering  process  is  described  here  very  nicely.  The  first
qualification  is  that  one  should  not  be  deluded  by  pride.  Because  the
conditioned soul is puffed up, thinking himself the lord of material nature, it is
very difficult for him to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One  should  know  by  the  cultivation  of  real  knowledge  that  he  is  not  lord  of
material nature; the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is
free from delusion caused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender. For
one  who  is  always  expecting  some  honor  in  this  material  world,  it  is  not
possible  to  surrender  to  the  Supreme  Person.  Pride  is  due  to  illusion,  for
although one comes here, stays for a brief time and then goes away, he has the
foolish  notion  that  he  is  the  lord  of  the  world.  He  thus  makes  all  things
complicated,  and  he  is  always  in  trouble.  The  whole  world  moves  under  this
impression.  People  are  considering  the  land,  this  earth,  to  belong  to  human
society,  and  they  have  divided  the  land  under  the  false  impression  that  they
are the proprietors. One has to get out of this false notion that human society
is the proprietor of this world. When one is freed from such a false notion, he
becomes  free  from  all  the  false  associations  caused  by  familial,  social  and
national affections. These faulty associations bind one to this material world.
After this stage, one has to develop spiritual knowledge. One has to cultivate
knowledge of what is actually his own and what is actually not his own. And
when one has an understanding of things as they are, he becomes free from all
dual  conceptions  such  as  happiness  and  distress,  pleasure  and  pain.  He
becomes  full  in  knowledge;  then  it  is  possible  for  him  to  surrender  to  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  6

Na TaÙaSaYaTae SaUYaaeR Na XaXaaªae Na Paavk-" )

YaÓTva Na iNavTaRNTae TaÖaMa ParMa& MaMa )) 6 ))

na tad bhäsayate süryo
na çaçäìko na pävakaù
yad gatvä na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama

SYNONYMS

na—not; tat—that; bhäsayate—illuminates; süryaù—the sun; na—nor;
çaçäìkaù—the moon; na—nor; pävakaù—fire, electricity; yat—where;
gatvä—going; na—never; nivartante—they come back; tat dhäma—that abode;
paramam—supreme; mama—My.

TRANSLATION

That supreme abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by

fire or electricity. Those who reach it never return to this material world.

PURPORT

The  spiritual  world,  the  abode  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,
Kåñëa—which is known as Kåñëaloka, Goloka Våndävana—is described here.
In the spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine, fire or electricity,
because  all  the  planets  are  self-luminous.  We  have  only  one  planet  in  this
universe, the sun, which is self-luminous, but all the planets in the spiritual sky
are  self-luminous.  The  shining  effulgence  of  all  those  planets  (called
Vaikuëöhas)  constitutes  the  shining  sky  known  as  the  brahmajyoti.  Actually,
the effulgence is emanating from the planet of Kåñëa, Goloka Våndävana. Part
of  that  shining  effulgence  is  covered  by  the mahat-tattva, the material world.
Other  than  this,  the  major  portion  of  that  shining  sky  is  full  of  spiritual
planets, which are called Vaikuëöhas, chief of which is Goloka Våndävana.

As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is in conditional

life,  but  as  soon  as  he  reaches  the  spiritual  sky  by  cutting  through  the  false,
perverted  tree  of  this  material  world,  he  becomes  liberated.  Then  there  is  no
chance  of  his  coming  back  here.  In  his  conditional  life,  the  living  entity
considers himself to be the lord of this material world, but in his liberated state
he enters into the spiritual kingdom and becomes an associate of the Supreme
Lord. There he enjoys eternal bliss, eternal life, and full knowledge.

One should be captivated by this information. He should desire to transfer
himself to that eternal world and extricate himself from this false reflection of
reality.  For  one  who  is  too  much  attached  to  this  material  world,  it  is  very
difficult to cut that attachment, but if he takes to Kåñëa consciousness there is
a  chance  of  gradually  becoming  detached.  One  has  to  associate  himself  with
devotees,  those  who  are  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  One  should  search  out  a
society  dedicated  to  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  learn  how  to  discharge
devotional  service.  In  this  way  he  can  cut  off  his  attachment  to  the  material
world. One cannot become detached from the attraction of the material world
simply  by  dressing  himself  in  saffron  cloth.  He  must  become  attached  to  the
devotional service of the Lord. Therefore one should take it very seriously that
devotional service as described in the Twelfth Chapter is the only way to get
out  of  this  false  representation  of  the  real  tree.  In  Chapter  Fourteen  the
contamination  of  all  kinds  of  processes  by  material  nature  is  described.  Only
devotional service is described as purely transcendental.

The  words  paramaà  mama  are  very  important  here.  Actually  every  nook
and  corner  is  the  property  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  but  the  spiritual  world  is
paramam, full of six opulences. The Kaöha Upaniñad (2.2.15) also confirms that
in  the  spiritual  world  there  is  no  need  of  sunshine,  moonshine  or  stars  (na
tatra süryo bhäti na candratärakam), for the whole spiritual sky is illuminated
by  the  internal  potency  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  That  supreme  abode  can  be
achieved only by surrender and by no other means.

TEXT  7

MaMaEva&Xaae Jaqvl/aeke- Jaqv>aUTa" SaNaaTaNa" )

MaNa"zïaNaqiNd]Yaai<a Pa[k*-iTaSQaaiNa k-zRiTa )) 7 ))

mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
manaù-ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati

SYNONYMS

mama—My; eva—certainly; aàçaù—fragmental particle; jéva-loke—in the
world of conditional life; jéva-bhütaù—the conditioned living entity;
sanätanaù—eternal; manaù—with the mind; ñañöhäni—the six;
indriyäëi—senses; prakåti—in material nature; sthäni—situated; karñati—is
struggling hard.

TRANSLATION

The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental parts.
Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses, which
include the mind.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  the  identity  of  the  living  being  is  clearly  given.  The  living
entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord—eternally. It is
not  that  he  assumes  individuality  in  his  conditional  life  and  in  his  liberated
state  becomes  one  with  the  Supreme  Lord.  He  is  eternally  fragmented.  It  is
clearly  said,  sanätanaù.  According  to  the  Vedic  version,  the  Supreme  Lord
manifests  and  expands  Himself  in  innumerable  expansions,  of  which  the
primary  expansions  are  called  viñëu-tattva  and  the  secondary  expansions  are
called  the  living  entities.  In  other  words,  the  viñëu-tattva  is  the  personal
expansion,  and  the  living  entities  are  the  separated  expansions.  By  His
personal  expansion,  He  is  manifested  in  various  forms  like  Lord  Räma,
Nåsiàhadeva, Viñëumürti and all the predominating Deities in the Vaikuëöha

planets.  The  separated  expansions,  the  living  entities,  are  eternally  servitors.
The  personal  expansions  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the
individual  identities  of  the  Godhead,  are  always  present.  Similarly,  the
separated  expansions  of  living  entities  have  their  identities.  As  fragmental
parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, the living entities also have fragmental
portions of His qualities, of which independence is one. Every living entity, as
an  individual  soul,  has  his  personal  individuality  and  a  minute  form  of
independence.  By  misuse  of  that  independence  one  becomes  a  conditioned
soul, and by proper use of independence he is always liberated. In either case,
he is qualitatively eternal, as the Supreme Lord is. In his liberated state he is
freed  from  this  material  condition,  and  he  is  under  the  engagement  of
transcendental service unto the Lord; in his conditioned life he is dominated
by  the  material  modes  of  nature,  and  he  forgets  the  transcendental  loving
service  of  the  Lord.  As  a  result,  he  has  to  struggle  very  hard  to  maintain  his
existence in the material world.

The living entities, not only human beings and the cats and dogs, but even
the  greater  controllers  of  the  material  world—Brahmä,  Lord  Çiva  and  even
Viñëu—are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. They are all eternal, not
temporary manifestations. The word karñati (“struggling” or “grappling hard”)
is  very  significant.  The  conditioned  soul  is  bound  up,  as  though  shackled  by
iron chains. He is bound up by the false ego, and the mind is the chief agent
which is driving him in this material existence. When the mind is in the mode
of goodness, his activities are good; when the mind is in the mode of passion,
his activities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode of ignorance,
he travels in the lower species of life. It is clear, however, in this verse, that the
conditioned  soul  is  covered  by  the  material  body,  with  the  mind  and  the
senses,  and  when  he  is  liberated  this  material  covering  perishes,  but  his
spiritual  body  manifests  itself  in  its  individual  capacity.  The  following
information  is  there  in  the  Mädhyandinäyana-çruti:  sa  vä  eña  brahma-niñöha
idaà çaréraà martyam atisåjya brahmäbhisampadya brahmaëä paçyati brahmaëä
çåëoti brahmaëaivedaà sarvam anubhavati. It is stated here that when a living
entity  gives  up  this  material  embodiment  and  enters  into  the  spiritual  world,
he revives his spiritual body, and in his spiritual body he can see the Supreme

Personality  of  Godhead  face  to  face.  He  can  hear  and  speak  to  Him  face  to
face, and he can understand the Supreme Personality as He is. From småti also
it  is  understood,  vasanti  yatra  puruñäù  sarve  vaikuëöha-mürtayaù:  in  the
spiritual planets everyone lives in bodies featured like the Supreme Personality
of Godhead’s. As far as bodily construction is concerned, there is no difference
between the part-and-parcel living entities and the expansions of viñëu-mürti.
In other words, at liberation the living entity gets a spiritual body by the grace
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The  words  mamaiväàçaù  (“fragmental  parts  and  parcels  of  the  Supreme
Lord”) are also very significant. The fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is
not like some material broken part. We have already understood in the Second
Chapter  that  the  spirit  cannot  be  cut  into  pieces.  This  fragment  is  not
materially  conceived.  It  is  not  like  matter,  which  can  be  cut  into  pieces  and
joined  together  again.  That  conception  is  not  applicable  here,  because  the
Sanskrit word sanätana (“eternal”) is used. The fragmental portion is eternal.
It is also stated in the beginning of the Second Chapter that in each and every
individual body the fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is present (dehino
’smin  yathä  dehe).  That  fragmental  portion,  when  liberated  from  the  bodily
entanglement,  revives  its  original  spiritual  body  in  the  spiritual  sky  in  a
spiritual planet and enjoys association with the Supreme Lord. It is, however,
understood here that the living entity, being the fragmental part and parcel of
the  Supreme  Lord,  is  qualitatively  one  with  the  Lord,  just  as  the  parts  and
parcels of gold are also gold.

TEXT  8

Xarqr& YadvaPanaeiTa YaÀaPYauT§-aMaTaqìr" )

Ga*hqTvETaaiNa Sa&YaaiTa vaYauGaRNDaaiNavaXaYaaTa( )) 8 ))

çaréraà yad aväpnoti
yac cäpy utkrämatéçvaraù
gåhétvaitäni saàyäti
väyur gandhän iväçayät

SYNONYMS

çaréram—the body; yat—as; aväpnoti—gets; yat—as; ca api—also;
utkrämati—gives up; éçvaraù—the lord of the body; gåhétvä—taking; etäni—all
these; saàyäti—goes away; väyuù—the air; gandhän—smells; iva—like;
äçayät—from their source.

TRANSLATION

The living entity in the material world carries his different conceptions of
life from one body to another as the air carries aromas. Thus he takes one kind
of body and again quits it to take another.

PURPORT

Here the living entity is described as éçvara, the controller of his own body.
If  he  likes,  he  can  change  his  body  to  a  higher  grade,  and  if  he  likes  he  can
move  to  a  lower  class.  Minute  independence  is  there.  The  change  his  body
undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death, the consciousness he has
created  will  carry  him  on  to  the  next  type  of  body.  If  he  has  made  his
consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he is sure to change to a cat’s or dog’s
body. And if he has fixed his consciousness on godly qualities, he will change
into  the  form  of  a  demigod.  And  if  he  is  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  he  will  be
transferred to Kåñëaloka in the spiritual world and will associate with Kåñëa. It
is a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything is finished.
The  individual  soul  is  transmigrating  from  one  body  to  another,  and  his
present body and present activities are the background of his next body. One
gets a different body according to karma, and he has to quit this body in due
course. It is stated here that the subtle body, which carries the conception of
the  next  body,  develops  another  body  in  the  next  life.  This  process  of
transmigrating  from  one  body  to  another  and  struggling  while  in  the  body  is
called karñati, or struggle for existence.

TEXT  9

é[ae}a& c+au" SPaXaRNa& c rSaNa& ga]a<aMaev c )

AiDaïaYa MaNaêaYa& ivzYaaNauPaSaevTae )) 9 ))

çrotraà cakñuù sparçanaà ca
rasanaà ghräëam eva ca
adhiñöhäya manaç cäyaà
viñayän upasevate

SYNONYMS

çrotram—ears; cakñuù—eyes; sparçanam—touch; ca—also; rasanam—tongue;
ghräëam—smelling power; eva—also; ca—and; adhiñöhäya—being situated in;
manaù—mind; ca—also; ayam—he; viñayän—sense objects;
upasevate—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain type of
ear, eye, tongue, nose and sense of touch, which are grouped about the mind.
He thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.

PURPORT

In  other  words,  if  the  living  entity  adulterates  his  consciousness  with  the
qualities of cats and dogs, in his next life he gets a cat or dog body and enjoys.
Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But if we mix water with a certain
color, it changes. Similarly, consciousness is pure, for the spirit soul is pure. But
consciousness is changed according to the association of the material qualities.
Real consciousness is Kåñëa consciousness. When, therefore, one is situated in
Kåñëa  consciousness,  he  is  in  his  pure  life.  But  if  his  consciousness  is
adulterated  by  some  type  of  material  mentality,  in  the  next  life  he  gets  a
corresponding body. He does not necessarily get a human body again; he can

get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod or one of many other forms, for there
are 8,400,000 species.

TEXT  10

oT§-aMaNTa& iSQaTa& vaiPa >auÅaNa& va Gau<aaiNvTaMa( )

ivMaU!a NaaNauPaXYaiNTa PaXYaiNTa jaNac+auz" )) 10 ))

utkrämantaà sthitaà väpi
bhuïjänaà vä guëänvitam
vimüòhä nänupaçyanti
paçyanti jïäna-cakñuñaù

SYNONYMS

utkrämantam—quitting the body; sthitam—situated in the body; vä
api—either; bhuïjänam—enjoying; vä—or; guëa-anvitam—under the spell of
the modes of material nature; vimüòhäù—foolish persons; na—never;
anupaçyanti—can see; paçyanti—can see; jïäna-cakñuñaù—those who have the
eyes of knowledge.

TRANSLATION

The foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body, nor can

they understand what sort of body he enjoys under the spell of the modes of
nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge can see all this.

PURPORT

The  word  jïäna-cakñuñaù  is  very  significant.  Without  knowledge,  one
cannot understand how a living entity leaves his present body, nor what form
of  body  he  is  going  to  take  in  the  next  life,  nor  even  why  he  is  living  in  a
particular type of body. This requires a great amount of knowledge understood
from  Bhagavad-gétä  and  similar  literatures  heard  from  a  bona  fide  spiritual

master.  One  who  is  trained  to  perceive  all  these  things  is  fortunate.  Every
living  entity  is  quitting  his  body  under  certain  circumstances,  he  is  living
under  certain  circumstances,  and  he  is  enjoying  under  certain  circumstances
under the spell of material nature. As a result, he is suffering different kinds of
happiness and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment. Persons who are
everlastingly  fooled  by  lust  and  desire  lose  all  power  to  understand  their
change of body and their stay in a particular body. They cannot comprehend
it.  Those  who  have  developed  spiritual knowledge, however, can see that the
spirit  is  different  from  the  body  and  is  changing  its  body  and  enjoying  in
different  ways.  A  person  in  such  knowledge  can  understand  how  the
conditioned  living  entity  is  suffering  in  this  material  existence.  Therefore
those  who  are  highly  developed  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  try  their  best  to  give
this knowledge to the people in general, for their conditional life is very much
troublesome. They should come out of it and be Kåñëa conscious and liberate
themselves to transfer to the spiritual world.

TEXT

 11

YaTaNTaae YaaeiGaNaêENa& PaXYaNTYaaTMaNYaviSQaTaMa( )

YaTaNTaae_PYak*-TaaTMaaNaae NaENa& PaXYaNTYaceTaSa" )) 11 ))

yatanto yoginaç cainaà
paçyanty ätmany avasthitam
yatanto ’py akåtätmäno
nainaà paçyanty acetasaù

SYNONYMS

yatantaù—endeavoring; yoginaù—transcendentalists; ca—also; enam—this;
paçyanti—can see; ätmani—in the self; avasthitam—situated;
yatantaù—endeavoring; api—although; akåta-ätmänaù—those without
self-realization; na—do not; enam—this; paçyanti—see; acetasaù—having
undeveloped minds.

TRANSLATION

The endeavoring transcendentalists, who are situated in self-realization, can

see all this clearly. But those whose minds are not developed and who are not
situated in self-realization cannot see what is taking place, though they may try
to.

PURPORT

There are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-realization,
but  one  who  is  not  situated  in  self-realization  cannot  see  how  things  are
changing  in  the  body  of  the  living  entity.  The  word  yoginaù  is  significant  in
this  connection.  In  the  present  day  there  are  many  so-called  yogés, and there
are  many  so-called  associations  of  yogés,  but  they  are  actually  blind  in  the
matter of self-realization. They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic
exercise  and  are  satisfied  if  the  body  is  well  built  and  healthy.  They  have  no
other information. They are called yatanto ’py akåtätmänaù. Even though they
are  endeavoring  in  a  so-called  yoga  system,  they  are  not  self-realized.  Such
people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the soul. Only
those who are actually in the yoga system and have realized the self, the world,
and  the  Supreme  Lord—in  other  words,  the  bhakti-yogés,  those  engaged  in
pure  devotional  service  in  Kåñëa  consciousness—can  understand  how  things
are taking place.

TEXT

 12

YadaidTYaGaTa& TaeJaae JaGaÙaSaYaTae_i%l/Ma( )

YaÀNd]MaiSa YaÀaGanaE TataeJaae iviÖ MaaMak-Ma( )) 12 ))

yad äditya-gataà tejo
jagad bhäsayate ’khilam
yac candramasi yac cägnau
tat tejo viddhi mämakam

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; äditya-gatam—in the sunshine; tejaù—splendor; jagat—the
whole world; bhäsayate—illuminates; akhilam—entirely; yat—that which;
candramasi—in the moon; yat—that which; ca—also; agnau—in fire;
tat—that; tejaù—splendor; viddhi—understand; mämakam—from Me.

TRANSLATION

The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole world,
comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor of fire are also
from Me.

PURPORT

The unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place. But one
can  begin  to  be  established  in  knowledge  by  understanding  what  the  Lord
explains  here.  Everyone  sees  the  sun,  moon,  fire  and  electricity.  One  should
simply  try  to  understand  that  the  splendor  of  the  sun,  the  splendor  of  the
moon,  and  the  splendor  of  electricity  or  fire  are  coming  from  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In such a conception of life, the beginning of Kåñëa
consciousness, lies a great deal of advancement for the conditioned soul in this
material world. The living entities are essentially the parts and parcels of the
Supreme Lord, and He is giving herewith the hint how they can come back to
Godhead, back to home.

From  this  verse  we  can  understand  that  the  sun  is  illuminating  the  whole
solar  system.  There  are  different  universes  and  solar  systems,  and  there  are
different suns, moons and planets also, but in each universe there is only one
sun.  As  stated  in  Bhagavad-gétä  (10.21),  the  moon  is  one  of  the  stars
(nakñaträëäm  ahaà  çaçé).  Sunlight  is  due  to  the  spiritual  effulgence  in  the
spiritual  sky  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  With  the  rise  of  the  sun,  the  activities  of
human beings are set up. They set fire to prepare their foodstuff, they set fire
to  start  the  factories,  etc.  So  many  things  are  done  with  the  help  of  fire.

Therefore  sunrise,  fire  and  moonlight  are  so  pleasing  to  the  living  entities.
Without their help no living entity can live. So if one can understand that the
light and splendor of the sun, moon and fire are emanating from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, then one’s Kåñëa consciousness will begin. By
the moonshine, all the vegetables are nourished. The moonshine is so pleasing
that  people  can  easily  understand  that  they  are  living  by  the  mercy  of  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Without His mercy there cannot be
sun,  without  His  mercy  there  cannot  be  moon,  and  without  His  mercy  there
cannot  be  fire,  and  without  the  help  of  sun,  moon  and  fire,  no  one  can  live.
These  are  some  thoughts  to  provoke  Kåñëa  consciousness  in  the  conditioned
soul.

TEXT  13

GaaMaaivXYa c >aUTaaiNa DaarYaaMYahMaaeJaSaa )

PauZ<aaiMa caEzDaq" SavaR" SaaeMaae >aUTva rSaaTMak-" )) 13 ))

gäm äviçya ca bhütäni
dhärayämy aham ojasä
puñëämi cauñadhéù sarväù
somo bhütvä rasätmakaù

SYNONYMS

gäm—the planets; äviçya—entering; ca—also; bhütäni—the living entities;
dhärayämi—sustain; aham—I; ojasä—by My energy; puñëämi—am nourishing;
ca—and; auñadhéù—vegetables; sarväù—all; somaù—the moon;
bhütvä—becoming; rasa-ätmakaù—supplying the juice.

TRANSLATION

I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become the

moon and thereby supply the juice of life to all vegetables.

PURPORT

It  is  understood  that  all  the  planets  are  floating  in  the  air  only  by  the
energy of the Lord. The Lord enters into every atom, every planet, and every
living being. That is discussed in the Brahma-saàhitä. It is said there that one
plenary  portion  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Paramätmä,  enters
into  the  planets,  the  universe,  the  living  entity,  and  even  into  the  atom.  So
due  to  His  entrance,  everything  is  appropriately  manifested.  When  the  spirit
soul is there, a living man can float on the water, but when the living spark is
out  of  the  body  and  the  body  is  dead,  the  body  sinks.  Of  course  when  it  is
decomposed it floats just like straw and other things, but as soon as the man is
dead, he at once sinks in the water. Similarly, all these planets are floating in
space,  and  this  is  due  to  the  entrance  of  the  supreme  energy  of  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  His  energy  is  sustaining  each  planet,  just  like  a
handful  of  dust.  If  someone  holds  a  handful  of  dust,  there  is  no  possibility  of
the  dust’s  falling,  but  if  one  throws  it  in  the  air  it  will  fall  down.  Similarly,
these planets, which are floating in the air, are actually held in the fist of the
universal  form  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  By  His  strength  and  energy,  all  moving
and  nonmoving  things  stay  in  their  place.  It  is  said  in  the  Vedic  hymns  that
because  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  the  sun  is  shining  and  the
planets are steadily moving. Were it not for Him, all the planets would scatter,
like  dust  in  air,  and  perish.  Similarly,  it  is  due  to  the Supreme Personality of
Godhead that the moon nourishes all vegetables. Due to the moon’s influence,
the  vegetables  become  delicious.  Without  the  moonshine,  the  vegetables  can
neither grow nor taste succulent. Human society is working, living comfortably
and  enjoying  food  due  to  the  supply  from  the  Supreme  Lord.  Otherwise,
mankind  could  not  survive.  The  word  rasätmakaù  is  very  significant.
Everything becomes palatable by the agency of the Supreme Lord through the
influence of the moon.

TEXT  14

Ah& vEìaNarae >aUTva Pa[ai<aNaa& dehMaaié[Ta" )

Pa[a<aaPaaNaSaMaaYau¢-" PacaMYaà& cTauivRDaMa( )) 14 ))

ahaà vaiçvänaro bhütvä
präëinäà deham äçritaù
präëäpäna-samäyuktaù
pacämy annaà catur-vidham

SYNONYMS

aham—I; vaiçvänaraù—My plenary portion as the digesting fire;
bhütvä—becoming; präëinäm—of all living entities; deham—in the bodies;
äçritaù—situated; präëa—the outgoing air; apäna—the down-going air;
samäyuktaù—keeping in balance; pacämi—I digest; annam—foodstuff;
catuù-vidham—the four kinds.

TRANSLATION

I am the fire of digestion in the bodies of all living entities, and I join with

the air of life, outgoing and incoming, to digest the four kinds of foodstuff.

PURPORT

According  to  Äyur-vedic  çästra,  we  understand  that  there  is  a  fire  in  the
stomach which digests all food sent there. When the fire is not blazing there is
no hunger, and when the fire is in order we become hungry. Sometimes when
the  fire  is  not  going  nicely,  treatment  is  required.  In  any  case,  this  fire  is
representative  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Vedic  mantras
(Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad  5.9.1)  also  confirm  that  the  Supreme  Lord  or
Brahman is situated in the form of fire within the stomach and is digesting all
kinds of foodstuff (ayam agnir vaiçvänaro yo ’yam antaù puruñe yenedam annaà
pacyate). Therefore since He is helping the digestion of all kinds of foodstuff,
the living entity is not independent in the eating process. Unless the Supreme
Lord helps him in digesting, there is no possibility of eating. He thus produces

and  digests  foodstuff,  and  by  His  grace  we  are  enjoying  life.  In  the
Vedänta-sütra (1.2.27) this is also confirmed. Çabdädibhyo ’ntaù pratiñöhänäc ca:
the Lord is situated within sound and within the body, within the air and even
within  the  stomach  as  the  digestive  force.  There  are  four  kinds  of
foodstuff—some are swallowed, some are chewed, some are licked up, and some
are sucked—and He is the digestive force for all of them.

TEXT

 15

SavRSYa cah& ôid Saiàivíae Mata" SMa*iTajaRNaMaPaaehNa& c )

vedEê SavŒrhMaev veÛae vedaNTak*-Üedivdev cahMa( )) 15 ))

sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedänta-kåd veda-vid eva cäham

SYNONYMS

sarvasya—of all living beings; ca—and; aham—I; hådi—in the heart;
sanniviñöaù—situated; mattaù—from Me; småtiù—remembrance;
jïänam—knowledge; apohanam—forgetfulness; ca—and; vedaiù—by the
Vedas; ca—also; sarvaiù—all; aham—I am; eva—certainly; vedyaù—knowable;
vedänta-kåt—the compiler of the Vedänta; veda-vit—the knower of the Vedas;
eva—certainly; ca—and; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

I am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge

and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas, I am to be known. Indeed, I am the
compiler of Vedänta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Lord  is  situated  as  Paramätmä  in  everyone’s  heart,  and  it  is
from Him that all activities are initiated. The living entity forgets everything
of  his  past  life,  but  he  has  to  act  according  to  the  direction  of  the  Supreme
Lord, who is witness to all his work. Therefore he begins his work according to
his  past  deeds.  Required  knowledge  is  supplied  to  him,  and  remembrance  is
given to him, and he forgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only
all-pervading;  He  is  also  localized  in  every  individual  heart.  He  awards  the
different  fruitive  results.  He  is  worshipable  not  only  as  the  impersonal
Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the localized Paramätmä,
but  as  the  form  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Vedas  as  well.  The  Vedas  give  the
right direction to people so that they can properly mold their lives and come
back  to  Godhead,  back  to  home.  The  Vedas  offer  knowledge  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and Kåñëa in His incarnation as Vyäsadeva is
the compiler of the Vedänta-sütra. The commentation on the Vedänta-sütra by
Vyäsadeva  in  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  gives  the  real  understanding  of
Vedänta-sütra.  The  Supreme  Lord  is  so  full  that  for  the  deliverance  of  the
conditioned soul He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of his
activity, and the giver of knowledge in the form of Vedas and as the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa,  the  teacher  of  the  Bhagavad-gétä.  He  is
worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good; God is all-merciful.
Antaù-praviñöaù çästä janänäm. The living entity forgets as soon as he quits
his present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by the Supreme Lord.
Although  he  forgets,  the  Lord  gives  him  the  intelligence  to  renew  his  work
where he ended his last life. So not only does a living entity enjoy or suffer in
this world according to the dictation from the Supreme Lord situated locally in
the heart, but he receives the opportunity to understand the Vedas from Him.
If  one  is  serious  about  understanding  the  Vedic  knowledge,  then  Kåñëa  gives
the  required  intelligence.  Why  does  He  present  the  Vedic  knowledge  for
understanding?  Because  a  living  entity  individually  needs  to  understand
Kåñëa. Vedic literature confirms this: yo ’sau sarvair vedair géyate. In all Vedic
literature,  beginning  from  the  four  Vedas,  Vedänta-sütra  and  the  Upaniñads
and Puräëas, the glories of the Supreme Lord are celebrated. By performance
of Vedic rituals, discussion of the Vedic philosophy and worship of the Lord in

devotional  service,  He  is  attained.  Therefore  the  purpose  of  the  Vedas  is  to
understand Kåñëa. The Vedas give us direction by which to understand Kåñëa
and the process of realizing Him. The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Vedänta-sütra (1.1.4) confirms this in the following words: tat tu
samanvayät.  One  can  attain  perfection  in  three  stages.  By  understanding
Vedic  literature  one  can  understand  his  relationship  with  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  by  performing  the  different  processes  one  can
approach  Him,  and  at  the  end  one  can  attain  the  supreme  goal,  who  is  no
other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse the purpose of
the  Vedas,  the  understanding  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  goal  of  the  Vedas  are
clearly defined.

TEXT  16

ÜaivMaaE PauåzaE l/aeke- +arêa+ar Wv c )

+ar" SavaRi<a >aUTaaiNa kU-$=SQaae_+ar oCYaTae )) 16 ))

dväv imau puruñau loke
kñaraç cäkñara eva ca
kñaraù sarväëi bhütäni
küöa-stho ’kñara ucyate

SYNONYMS

dvau—two; imau—these; puruñau—living entities; loke—in the world;
kñaraù—fallible; ca—and; akñaraù—infallible; eva—certainly; ca—and;
kñaraù—fallible; sarväëi—all; bhütäni—living entities; küöa-sthaù—in
oneness; akñaraù—infallible; ucyate—is said.

TRANSLATION

There are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In the material
world every living entity is fallible, and in the spiritual world every living entity
is called infallible.

PURPORT

As  already  explained,  the  Lord  in  His  incarnation  as  Vyäsadeva  compiled
the  Vedänta-sütra.  Here  the  Lord  is  giving,  in  summary,  the  contents  of  the
Vedänta-sütra.  He  says  that  the  living  entities,  who  are  innumerable,  can  be
divided into two classes—the fallible and the infallible. The living entities are
eternally separated parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When  they  are  in  contact  with  the  material  world  they  are  called jéva-bhüta,
and the Sanskrit words given here, kñaraù sarväëi bhütäni, mean that they are
fallible. Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
however,  are  called  infallible.  Oneness  does  not  mean  that  they  have  no
individuality,  but  that  there  is  no  disunity.  They  are  all  agreeable  to  the
purpose of the creation. Of course, in the spiritual world there is no such thing
as  creation,  but  since  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  as  stated  in  the
Vedänta-sütra, is the source of all emanations, that conception is explained.

According  to  the  statement  of  the  Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Kåñëa, there are two classes of living entities. The Vedas give evidence of this,
so  there  is  no  doubt  about  it.  The  living  entities  who  are  struggling  in  this
world  with  the  mind  and  five  senses  have  their  material  bodies,  which  are
changing.  As  long  as  a  living  entity  is  conditioned,  his  body  changes  due  to
contact  with  matter;  matter  is  changing,  so  the  living  entity  appears  to  be
changing. But in the spiritual world the body is not made of matter; therefore
there  is  no  change.  In  the  material  world  the  living  entity  undergoes  six
then  dwindling  and
changes—birth,  growth,  duration,  reproduction, 
vanishing.  These  are  the  changes  of  the  material  body.  But  in  the  spiritual
world the body does not change; there is no old age, there is no birth, there is
no death. There all exists in oneness. Kñaraù sarväëi bhütäni: any living entity
who has come in contact with matter, beginning from the first created being,
Brahmä,  down  to  a  small  ant,  is  changing  its  body;  therefore  they  are  all
fallible. In the spiritual world, however, they are always liberated in oneness.

TEXT  17

otaMa" PauåzSTvNYa" ParMaaTMaeTYaudaôTa" )

Yaae l/aek-}aYaMaaivXYa ib>aTYaRVYaYa wRìr" )) 17 ))

uttamaù puruñas tv anyaù
paramätmety udähåtaù
yo loka-trayam äviçya
bibharty avyaya éçvaraù

SYNONYMS

uttamaù—the best; puruñaù—personality; tu—but; anyaù—another;
parama—the supreme; ätmä—self; iti—thus; udähåtaù—is said; yaù—who;
loka—of the universe; trayam—the three divisions; äviçya—entering;
bibharti—is maintaining; avyayaù—inexhaustible; éçvaraù—the Lord.

TRANSLATION

Besides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Supreme Soul,

the imperishable Lord Himself, who has entered the three worlds and is
maintaining them.

PURPORT

The  idea  of  this  verse  is  very  nicely  expressed  in  the  Kaöha Upaniñad
(2.2.13) and Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (6.13). It is clearly stated there that above
the  innumerable  living  entities,  some  of  whom  are  conditioned  and  some  of
whom are liberated, there is the Supreme Personality, who is Paramätmä. The
Upaniñadic  verse  runs  as  follows:  nityo  nityänäà  cetanaç  cetanänäm.  The
purport is that amongst all the living entities, both conditioned and liberated,
there is one supreme living personality, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who maintains them and gives them all the facility of enjoyment according to
different work. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in everyone’s
heart as Paramätmä. A wise man who can understand Him is eligible to at in
perfect peace, not others.

TEXT  18

YaSMaaT+arMaTaqTaae_hMa+aradiPa caetaMa" )

ATaae_iSMa l/aeke- vede c Pa[iQaTa" PauåzaetaMa" )) 18 ))

yasmät kñaram atéto ’ham
akñaräd api cottamaù
ato ’smi loke vede ca
prathitaù puruñottamaù

SYNONYMS

yasmät—because; kñaram—to the fallible; atétaù—transcendental; aham—I
am; akñarät—beyond the infallible; api—also; ca—and; uttamaù—the best;
ataù—therefore; asmi—I am; loke—in the world; vede—in the Vedic
literature; ca—and; prathitaù—celebrated; puruña-uttamaù—as the Supreme
Personality.

TRANSLATION

Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and
because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas as
that Supreme Person.

PURPORT

No  one  can  surpass  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa—neither
the  conditioned  soul  nor  the  liberated  soul.  He  is  therefore  the  greatest  of
personalities.  Now  it  is  clear  here  that  the  living  entities  and  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  are  individuals.  The  difference  is  that  the  living
entities,  either  in  the  conditioned  state  or  in  the  liberated  state,  cannot
surpass in quantity the inconceivable potencies of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities

as being on the same level or equal in all respects. There is always the question
of superiority and inferiority between their personalities. The word uttama is
very significant. No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The  word  loke  signifies  “in  the  pauruña  ägama  (the  småti  scriptures).”  As
confirmed  in  the  Nirukti  dictionary,  lokyate  vedärtho  ’nena:  “The  purpose  of
the Vedas is explained by the småti scriptures.”

The Supreme Lord, in His localized aspect of Paramätmä, is also described
in the Vedas themselves. The following verse appears in the Vedas (Chändogya
Upaniñad  8.12.3):  tävad  eña  samprasädo  ’smäc  charérät  samutthäya  paraà
jyoti-rüpaà  sampadya  svena  rüpeëäbhiniñpadyate  sa  uttamaù  puruñaù.  “The
Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal brahmajyoti; then in
His  form  He  remains  in  His  spiritual  identity.  That  Supreme  is  called  the
Supreme Personality.” This means that the Supreme Personality is exhibiting
and diffusing His spiritual effulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That
Supreme Personality also has a localized aspect as Paramätmä. By incarnating
Himself as the son of Satyavaté and Paräçara, He explains the Vedic knowledge
as Vyäsadeva.

TEXT  19

Yaae MaaMaevMaSaMMaU!ae JaaNaaiTa PauåzaetaMaMa( )

Sa SavRivÙJaiTa Maa& SavR>aaveNa >aarTa )) 19 ))

yo mäm evam asammüòho
jänäti puruñottamam
sa sarva-vid bhajati mäà
sarva-bhävena bhärata

SYNONYMS

yaù—anyone who; mäm—Me; evam—thus; asammüòhaù—without a doubt;
jänäti—knows; puruña-uttamam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
saù—he; sarva-vit—the knower of everything; bhajati—renders devotional

service; mäm—unto Me; sarva-bhävena—in all respects; bhärata—O son of
Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Whoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without
doubting, is the knower of everything. He therefore engages himself in full
devotional service to Me, O son of Bharata.

PURPORT

There  are  many  philosophical  speculations  about  the  constitutional
position  of  the  living  entities  and  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth.  Now  in  this
verse  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  clearly  explains  that  anyone  who
knows  Lord  Kåñëa  to  be  the  Supreme  Person  is  actually  the  knower  of
everything.  The  imperfect  knower  goes  on  simply  speculating  about  the
Absolute  Truth,  but  the  perfect  knower,  without  wasting  his  valuable  time,
engages directly in Kåñëa consciousness, the devotional service of the Supreme
Lord.  Throughout  the  whole  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  this  fact  is  being  stressed  at
every  step.  And  still  there  are  so  many  stubborn  commentators  on
Bhagavad-gétä  who  consider  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth  and  the  living
entities to be one and the same.

Vedic  knowledge  is  called  çruti,  learning  by  aural  reception.  One  should
actually  receive  the  Vedic  message  from  authorities  like  Kåñëa  and  His
representatives.  Here  Kåñëa  distinguishes  everything  very  nicely,  and  one
should hear from this source. Simply to hear like the hogs is not sufficient; one
must  be  able  to  understand  from  the  authorities.  It  is  not  that  one  should
from
simply 
Bhagavad-gétä that these living entities are always subordinate to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Anyone who is able to understand this, according to
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa,  knows  the  purpose  of  the
Vedas; no one else knows the purpose of the Vedas.

speculate  academically.  One 

submissively  hear 

should 

The  word  bhajati  is  very  significant.  In  many  places  the  word  bhajati  is
expressed in relationship with the service of the Supreme Lord. If a person is

engaged in full Kåñëa consciousness, in the devotional service of the Lord, it is
to  be  understood  that  he  has  understood  all  the  Vedic  knowledge.  In  the
Vaiñëava paramparä it is said that if one is engaged in the devotional service of
Kåñëa, then there is no need for any other spiritual process for understanding
the Supreme Absolute Truth. He has already come to the point, because he is
engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord.  He  has  ended  all  preliminary
processes  of  understanding.  But  if  anyone,  after  speculating  for  hundreds  of
thousands  of  lives,  does  not  come  to  the  point  that  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead and that one has to surrender there, all his speculation
for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time.

TEXT  20

wiTa GauùTaMa& XaañiMadMau¢&- MaYaaNaga )

WTad(bud(ßa buiÖMaaNSYaaTk*-Tak*-TYaê >aarTa )) 20 ))

iti guhyatamaà çästram
idam uktaà mayänagha
etad buddhvä buddhimän syät
kåta-kåtyaç ca bhärata

SYNONYMS

iti—thus; guhya-tamam—the most confidential; çästram—revealed scripture;
idam—this; uktam—disclosed; mayä—by Me; anagha—O sinless one;
etat—this; buddhvä—understanding; buddhi-män—intelligent; syät—one
becomes; kåta-kåtyaù—the most perfect in his endeavors; ca—and;
bhärata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless one, and
it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this will become wise, and his
endeavors will know perfection.

PURPORT

The  Lord  clearly  explains  here  that  this  is  the  substance  of  all  revealed
scriptures.  And  one  should  understand  this  as  it  is  given  by  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  Thus  one  will  become  intelligent  and  perfect  in
transcendental  knowledge.  In  other  words,  by  understanding  this  philosophy
of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  engaging  in  His  transcendental
service,  everyone  can  become  freed  from  all  contaminations  of  the  modes  of
material  nature.  Devotional  service  is  a  process  of  spiritual  understanding.
Wherever  devotional  service  exists,  the  material  contamination  cannot
coexist. Devotional service to the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the
same  because  they  are  spiritual;  devotional  service  takes  place  within  the
internal  energy  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  Lord  is  said  to  be  the  sun,  and
ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is present, there is no question of
darkness. Therefore, whenever devotional service is present under the proper
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, there is no question of ignorance.

Everyone must take to this consciousness of Kåñëa and engage in devotional
service to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comes to this position of
understanding Kåñëa and engages in devotional service, however intelligent he
may be in the estimation of some common man, he is not perfectly intelligent.
The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha, “O
sinless  one,”  means  that  unless  one  is  free  from  all  sinful  reactions  it  is  very
difficult to understand Kåñëa. One has to become free from all contamination,
all sinful activities; then he can understand. But devotional service is so pure
and  potent  that  once  one  is  engaged  in  devotional  service  he  automatically
comes to the stage of sinlessness.

While  one  is  performing  devotional  service  in  the  association  of  pure
devotees in full Kåñëa consciousness, there are certain things which require to
be  vanquished  altogether.  The  most  important  thing  one  has  to  surmount  is
weakness of the heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire to lord it over
material  nature.  Thus  one  gives  up  the  transcendental  loving  service  of  the
Supreme Lord. The second weakness of the heart is that as one increases the
propensity to lord it over material nature, he becomes attached to matter and

the possession of matter. The problems of material existence are due to these
weaknesses  of  the  heart.  In  this  chapter  the  first  five  verses  describe  the
process of freeing oneself from these weaknesses of heart, and the rest of the
chapter, from the sixth verse through the end, discusses puruñottama-yoga.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifteenth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of Puruñottama-yoga, the Yoga of the Supreme
Person.

- CHAPTER 16 -
The Divine And Demoniac Natures

TEXTS

 1–3

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

A>aYa& SatvSa&éuiÖjaRNaYaaeGaVYaviSQaiTa" )

daNa& dMaê Yajê SvaDYaaYaSTaPa AaJaRvMa( )) 1 ))

Aih&Saa SaTYaMa§-aeDaSTYaaGa" XaaiNTarPaEéuNaMa( )

 dYaa >aUTaeZvl/aelu/PTv& MaadRv& hqrcaPal/Ma( )) 2 ))

TaeJa" +aMaa Da*iTa" XaaEcMad]aehae NaaiTaMaaiNaTaa )

>aviNTa SaMPad& dEvqMai>aJaaTaSYa >aarTa )) 3 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
abhayaà sattva-saàçuddhir
jïäna-yoga-vyavasthitiù
dänaà damaç ca yajïaç ca

svädhyäyas tapa ärjavam

ahiàsä satyam akrodhas
tyägaù çäntir apaiçunam
dayä bhüteñv aloluptvaà
märdavaà hrér acäpalam

tejaù kñamä dhåtiù çaucam
adroho näti-mänitä
bhavanti sampadaà daivém
abhijätasya bhärata

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
abhayam—fearlessness; sattva-saàçuddhiù—purification of one’s existence;
jïäna—in knowledge; yoga—of linking up; vyavasthitiù—the situation;
dänam—charity; damaù—controlling the mind; ca—and;
yajïaù—performance of sacrifice; ca—and; svädhyäyaù—study of Vedic
literature; tapaù—austerity; ärjavam—simplicity; ahiàsä—nonviolence;
satyam—truthfulness; akrodhaù—freedom from anger; tyägaù—renunciation;
çäntiù—tranquillity; apaiçunam—aversion to fault-finding; dayä—mercy;
bhüteñu—towards all living entities; aloluptvam—freedom from greed;
märdavam—gentleness; hréù—modesty; acäpalam—determination;
tejaù—vigor; kñamä—forgiveness; dhåtiù—fortitude; çaucam—cleanliness;
adrohaù—freedom from envy; na—not; ati-mänitä—expectation of honor;
bhavanti—are; sampadam—the qualities; daivém—the transcendental nature;
abhijätasya—of one who is born of; bhärata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Fearlessness; purification of

one’s existence; cultivation of spiritual knowledge; charity; self-control;
performance of sacrifice; study of the Vedas; austerity; simplicity; nonviolence;
truthfulness; freedom from anger; renunciation; tranquillity; aversion to

faultfinding; compassion for all living entities; freedom from covetousness;
gentleness; modesty; steady determination; vigor; forgiveness; fortitude;
cleanliness; and freedom from envy and from the passion for honor—these
transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with
divine nature.

PURPORT

In the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this material
world  was  explained.  The  extra  roots  coming  out  of  it  were  compared  to  the
activities  of  the  living  entities,  some  auspicious,  some  inauspicious.  In  the
Ninth  Chapter,  also,  the  devas,  or  godly,  and  the  asuras,  the  ungodly,  or
demons, were explained. Now, according to Vedic rites, activities in the mode
of  goodness  are  considered  auspicious  for  progress  on  the  path  of  liberation,
and such activities are known as daivé prakåti, transcendental by nature. Those
who  are  situated  in  the  transcendental  nature  make  progress  on  the  path  of
liberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion and ignorance, on
the  other  hand,  there  is  no  possibility  of  liberation.  Either  they  will  have  to
remain in this material world as human beings, or they will descend among the
species of animals or even lower life forms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord
explains  both  the  transcendental  nature  and  its  attendant  qualities  and  the
demoniac  nature  and  its  qualities.  He  also  explains  the  advantages  and
disadvantages of these qualities.

The  word  abhijätasya  in  reference  to  one  born  of  transcendental  qualities
or godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child in a godly atmosphere
is  known  in  the  Vedic  scriptures  as  Garbhädhäna-saàskära.  If  the  parents
want  a  child  in  the  godly  qualities  they  should  follow  the  ten  principles
recommended for the social life of the human being. In Bhagavad-gétä we have
studied also before that sex life for begetting a good child is Kåñëa Himself. Sex
life  is  not  condemned,  provided  the  process  is  used  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.
Those who are in Kåñëa consciousness at least should not beget children like
cats and dogs but should beget them so that they may become Kåñëa conscious
after  birth.  That  should  be  the  advantage  of  children  born  of  a  father  and

mother absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness.

The  social  institution  known  as  varëäçrama-dharma—the  institution
dividing  society  into  four  divisions  of  social  life  and  four  occupational
divisions or castes—is not meant to divide human society according to birth.
Such divisions are in terms of educational qualifications. They are to keep the
society in a state of peace and prosperity. The qualities mentioned herein are
explained  as  transcendental  qualities  meant  for  making  a  person  progress  in
spiritual understanding so that he can get liberated from the material world.

In the varëäçrama institution the sannyäsé, or the person in the renounced
order of life, is considered to be the head or the spiritual master of all the social
statuses and orders. A brähmaëa is considered to be the spiritual master of the
three  other  sections  of  a  society,  namely,  the  kñatriyas,  the  vaiçyas  and  the
çüdras, but a sannyäsé, who is on the top of the institution, is considered to be
the  spiritual  master  of  the  brähmaëas  also.  For  a  sannyäsé,  the  first
qualification should be fearlessness. Because a sannyäsé has to be alone without
any support or guarantee of support, he has simply to depend on the mercy of
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  If  one  thinks,  “After  I  leave  my
connections, who will protect me?” he should not accept the renounced order
of life. One must be fully convinced that Kåñëa or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead  in  His  localized  aspect  as  Paramätmä  is  always  within,  that  He  is
seeing everything and He always knows what one intends to do. One must thus
have  firm  conviction  that  Kåñëa  as  Paramätmä  will  take  care  of  a  soul
surrendered to Him. “I shall never be alone,” one should think. “Even if I live
in the darkest regions of a forest I shall be accompanied by Kåñëa, and He will
give  me  all  protection.”  That  conviction  is  called  abhayam,  fearlessness.  This
state of mind is necessary for a person in the renounced order of life.

Then  he  has  to  purify  his  existence.  There  are  so  many  rules  and
regulations to be followed in the renounced order of life. Most important of all,
a  sannyäsé  is  strictly  forbidden  to  have  any  intimate  relationship  with  a
woman. He is even forbidden to talk with a woman in a secluded place. Lord
Caitanya  was  an  ideal  sannyäsé,  and  when  He  was  at  Puré  His  feminine
devotees could not even come near to offer their respects. They were advised
to bow down from a distant place. This is not a sign of hatred for women as a

class,  but  it  is  a  stricture  imposed  on  the  sannyäsé  not  to  have  close
connections  with  women.  One  has  to  follow  the  rules  and  regulations  of  a
particular status of life in order to purify his existence. For a sannyäsé, intimate
relations  with  women  and  possession  of  wealth  for  sense  gratification  are
strictly forbidden. The ideal sannyäsé was Lord Caitanya Himself, and we can
learn from His life that He was very strict in regards to women. Although He is
considered to be the most liberal incarnation of Godhead, accepting the most
fallen  conditioned  souls,  He  strictly  followed the rules and regulations of the
sannyäsa order of life in connection with association with woman. One of His
personal  associates,  namely  Choöa  Haridäsa,  was  associated  with  Lord
Caitanya  along  with  His  other  confidential  personal  associates,  but  somehow
or  other  this  Choöa  Haridäsa  looked  lustily  on  a  young  woman,  and  Lord
Caitanya  was  so  strict  that  He  at  once  rejected  him  from  the  society  of  His
personal  associates.  Lord  Caitanya  said,  “For  a  sannyäsé  or  anyone  who  is
aspiring  to  get  out  of  the  clutches  of  material  nature  and  trying  to  elevate
himself  to  the  spiritual  nature  and  go  back  home,  back  to  Godhead,  for  him,
looking  toward  material  possessions  and  women  for  sense  gratification—not
even enjoying them, but just looking toward them with such a propensity—is
so  condemned  that  he  had  better  commit  suicide  before  experiencing  such
illicit desires.” So these are the processes for purification.

The next item is jïäna-yoga-vyavasthiti: being engaged in the cultivation of
knowledge.  Sannyäsé  life  is  meant  for  distributing  knowledge  to  the
householders  and  others  who  have  forgotten  their  real  life  of  spiritual
advancement.  A  sannyäsé  is  supposed  to  beg  from  door  to  door  for  his
livelihood, but this does not mean that he is a beggar. Humility is also one of
the  qualifications  of  a  transcendentally  situated  person,  and  out  of  sheer
humility  the  sannyäsé  goes  from  door  to  door,  not  exactly  for  the  purpose  of
begging, but to see the householders and awaken them to Kåñëa consciousness.
This is the duty of a sannyäsé. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by his
spiritual  master,  he  should  preach  Kåñëa  consciousness  with  logic  and
understanding,  and  if  one  is  not  so  advanced  he  should  not  accept  the
renounced order of life. But even if one has accepted the renounced order of
life  without  sufficient  knowledge,  he  should  engage  himself  fully  in  hearing

from a bona fide spiritual master to cultivate knowledge. A sannyäsé, or one in
the renounced order of life, must be situated in fearlessness, sattva-saàçuddhi
(purity) and jïäna-yoga (knowledge).

The  next  item  is  charity.  Charity  is  meant  for  the  householders.  The
householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spend fifty
percent  of  their  income  to  propagate  Kåñëa  consciousness  all  over  the  world.
Thus  a  householder  should  give  in  charity  to  institutional  societies  that  are
engaged in that way. Charity should be given to the right receiver. There are
different kinds of charity, as will be explained later on—charity in the modes
of  goodness,  passion  and  ignorance.  Charity  in  the  mode  of  goodness  is
recommended  by  the  scriptures,  but  charity  in  the  modes  of  passion  and
ignorance is not recommended, because it is simply a waste of money. Charity
should be given only to propagate Kåñëa consciousness all over the world. That
is charity in the mode of goodness.

Then  as  far  as  dama  (self-control)  is  concerned,  it  is  not  only  meant  for
other  orders  of  religious  society,  but  is  especially  meant  for  the  householder.
Although  he  has  a  wife,  a  householder  should  not  use  his  senses  for  sex  life
unnecessarily.  There  are  restrictions  for  the  householders  even  in  sex  life,
which should only be engaged in for the propagation of children. If he does not
require  children,  he  should  not  enjoy  sex  life  with  his  wife.  Modern  society
enjoys  sex  life  with  contraceptive  methods  or  more  abominable  methods  to
avoid the responsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental quality,
but is demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to make progress
in  spiritual  life,  he  must  control  his  sex  life  and  should  not  beget  a  child
without the purpose of serving Kåñëa. If he is able to beget children who will
be in Kåñëa consciousness, one can produce hundreds of children, but without
this capacity one should not indulge only for sense pleasure.

Sacrifice  is  another  item  to  be  performed  by  the  householders,  because
sacrifices  require  a  large  amount  of  money.  Those  in  other  orders  of  life,
namely  brahmacarya,  vänaprastha  and  sannyäsa,  have  no  money;  they  live  by
begging.  So  performance  of  different  types  of  sacrifice  is  meant  for  the
householders.  They  should  perform  agni-hotra  sacrifices  as  enjoined  in  the
Vedic literature, but such sacrifices at the present moment are very expensive,

and it is not possible for any householder to perform them. The best sacrifice
recommended in this age is called saìkértana-yajïa. This saìkértana-yajïa, the
chanting  of  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,
Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare  Hare,  is  the  best  and  most  inexpensive
sacrifice;  everyone  can  adopt  it  and  derive  benefit.  So  these  three  items,
namely charity, sense control and performance of sacrifice, are meant for the
householder.

Then  svädhyäya,  Vedic  study,  is  meant  for  brahmacarya,  or  student  life.
Brahmacärés should have no connection with women; they should live a life of
celibacy and engage the mind in the study of Vedic literature for cultivation of
spiritual knowledge. This is called svädhyäya.

Tapas, or austerity, is especially meant for the retired life. One should not
remain a householder throughout his whole life; he must always remember that
there  are  four  divisions  of  life—brahmacarya,  gåhastha,  vänaprastha  and
sannyäsa. So after gåhastha, householder life, one should retire. If one lives for
a hundred years, he should spend twenty-five years in student life, twenty-five
in  householder  life,  twenty-five  in  retired  life  and  twenty-five  in  the
renounced  order  of  life.  These  are  the  regulations  of  the  Vedic  religious
discipline.  A  man  retired  from  household life must practice austerities of the
body, mind and tongue. That is tapasya. The entire varëäçrama-dharma society
is  meant  for  tapasya.  Without  tapasya,  or  austerity,  no  human  being  can  get
liberation. The theory that there is no need of austerity in life, that one can go
on  speculating  and  everything  will  be  nice,  is  recommended  neither  in  the
Vedic  literature  nor  in  Bhagavad-gétä.  Such  theories  are  manufactured  by
show-bottle  spiritualists  who  are  trying  to  gather  more  followers.  If  there  are
restrictions, rules and regulations, people will not become attracted. Therefore
those  who  want  followers  in  the  name  of  religion,  just  to  have  a  show  only,
don’t restrict the lives of their students, nor their own lives. But that method is
not approved by the Vedas.

As far as the brahminical quality of simplicity is concerned, not only should
a particular order of life follow this principle, but every member, be he in the
brahmacäré  äçrama,  gåhastha  äçrama,  vänaprastha  äçrama  or  sannyäsa  äçrama.
One should be very simple and straightforward.

Ahiàsä  means  not  arresting  the  progressive  life  of  any  living  entity.  One
should  not  think  that  since  the  spirit  spark  is  never  killed  even  after  the
killing of the body there is no harm in killing animals for sense gratification.
People are now addicted to eating animals, in spite of having an ample supply
of  grains,  fruits  and  milk.  There  is  no  necessity  for  animal  killing.  This
injunction  is  for  everyone.  When  there  is  no  alternative,  one  may  kill  an
animal,  but  it  should  be  offered  in  sacrifice.  At  any  rate,  when  there  is  an
ample  food  supply  for  humanity,  persons  who  are  desiring  to  make
advancement  in  spiritual  realization  should  not  commit  violence  to  animals.
Real ahiàsä means not checking anyone’s progressive life. The animals are also
making progress in their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one category
of  animal  life  to  another.  If  a  particular  animal  is  killed,  then  his  progress  is
checked.  If  an  animal  is  staying  in  a  particular  body  for  so  many  days  or  so
many years and is untimely killed, then he has to come back again in that form
of  life  to  complete  the  remaining  days  in  order  to  be  promoted  to  another
species of life. So their progress should not be checked simply to satisfy one’s
palate. This is called ahiàsä.

Satyam.  This  word  means  that  one  should  not  distort  the  truth  for  some
personal interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficult passages, but the
meaning  or  the  purpose  should  be  learned  from  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master.
That is the process for understanding the Vedas. Çruti means that one should
hear from the authority. One should not construe some interpretation for his
personal  interest.  There  are  so  many  commentaries  on  Bhagavad-gétä  that
misinterpret  the  original  text.  The  real  import  of  the  word  should  be
presented, and that should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master.

Akrodha means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one should be
tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomes polluted. Anger
is  a  product  of  the  mode  of  passion  and  lust,  so  one  who  is  transcendentally
situated  should  check  himself  from  anger.  Apaiçunam  means  that  one  should
not  find  fault  with  others  or  correct  them  unnecessarily.  Of  course  to  call  a
thief  a  thief  is  not  faultfinding,  but  to  call  an  honest  person  a  thief  is  very
much offensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hré means
that  one  should  be  very  modest  and  must  not  perform  some  act  which  is

abominable. Acäpalam, determination, means that one should not be agitated
or frustrated in some attempt. There may be failure in some attempt, but one
should  not  be  sorry  for  that;  he  should  make  progress  with  patience  and
determination.

The  word  tejas  used  here  is  meant  for  the  kñatriyas.  The  kñatriyas  should
always  be  very  strong  to  be  able  to  give  protection  to  the  weak.  They  should
not pose themselves as nonviolent. If violence is required, they must exhibit it.
But a person who is able to curb down his enemy may under certain conditions
show forgiveness. He may excuse minor offenses.

Çaucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one’s dealings
also.  It  is  especially  meant  for  the  mercantile  people,  who  should  not  deal  in
the black market. Näti-mänitä, not expecting honor, applies to the çüdras, the
worker class, which are considered, according to Vedic injunctions, to be the
lowest  of  the  four  classes.  They  should  not  be  puffed  up  with  unnecessary
prestige or honor and should remain in their own status. It is the duty of the
çüdras to offer respect to the higher class for the upkeep of the social order.

All these twenty-six qualifications mentioned are transcendental qualities.
They  should  be  cultivated  according  to  the  different  statuses  of  social  and
occupational  order.  The  purport  is  that  even  though  material  conditions  are
miserable,  if  these  qualities  are  developed  by  practice,  by  all  classes  of  men,
then  gradually  it  is  possible  to  rise  to  the  highest  platform  of  transcendental
realization.

TEXT

 4

dM>aae dPaaeR_i>aMaaNaê §-aeDa" PaaåZYaMaev c )

AjaNa& cai>aJaaTaSYa PaaQaR SaMPadMaaSaurqMa( )) 4 ))

dambho darpo ’bhimänaç ca
krodhaù päruñyam eva ca
ajïänaà cäbhijätasya
pärtha sampadam äsurém

SYNONYMS

dambhaù—pride; darpaù—arrogance; abhimänaù—conceit; ca—and;
krodhaù—anger; päruñyam—harshness; eva—certainly; ca—and;
ajïänam—ignorance; ca—and; abhijätasya—of one who is born of; pärtha—O
son of Påthä; sampadam—the qualities; äsurém—the demoniac nature.

TRANSLATION

Pride, arrogance, conceit, anger, harshness and ignorance—these qualities

belong to those of demoniac nature, O son of Påthä.

PURPORT

In  this  verse,  the  royal  road  to  hell  is  described.  The  demoniac  want  to
make  a  show  of  religion  and  advancement in spiritual science, although they
do not follow the principles. They are always arrogant or proud in possessing
some  type  of  education  or  so  much  wealth.  They  desire  to  be  worshiped  by
others,  and  demand  respectability,  although  they  do  not  command  respect.
Over  trifles  they  become  very  angry  and  speak  harshly,  not  gently.  They  do
not  know  what  should  be  done  and  what  should  not  be  done.  They  do
everything  whimsically,  according  to  their  own  desire,  and  they  do  not
recognize any authority. These demoniac qualities are taken on by them from
the beginning of their bodies in the wombs of their mothers, and as they grow
they manifest all these inauspicious qualities.

TEXT  5

dEvq SaMPaiÜMaae+aaYa iNabNDaaYaaSaurq MaTaa )

Maa éuc" SaMPad& dEvqMai>aJaaTaae_iSa Paa<@v )) 5 ))

daivé sampad vimokñäya
nibandhäyäsuré matä

mä çucaù sampadaà daivém
abhijäto ’si päëòava

SYNONYMS

daivé—transcendental; sampat—assets; vimokñäya—meant for liberation;
nibandhäya—for bondage; äsuré—demoniac qualities; matä—are considered;
mä—do not; çucaù—worry; sampadam—assets; daivém—transcendental;
abhijätaù—born of; asi—you are; päëòava—O son of Päëòu.

TRANSLATION

The transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the
demoniac qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Päëòu, for you
are born with the divine qualities.

PURPORT

Lord  Kåñëa  encouraged  Arjuna  by  telling  him  that  he  was  not  born  with
demoniac qualities. His involvement in the fight was not demoniac, because he
was  considering  the  pros  and  cons.  He  was  considering  whether  respectable
persons such as Bhéñma and Droëa should be killed or not, so he was not acting
under the influence of anger, false prestige or harshness. Therefore he was not
of the quality of the demons. For a kñatriya, a military man, shooting arrows at
the  enemy  is  considered  transcendental,  and  refraining  from  such  a  duty  is
demoniac.  Therefore  there  was  no  cause  for  Arjuna  to  lament.  Anyone  who
performs  the  regulative  principles  of  the  different  orders  of 
is
transcendentally situated.

life 

TEXT  6

ÜaE >aUTaSaGaaŒ l/aeke-_iSMaNdEv AaSaur Wv c )

dEvae ivSTarXa" Pa[ae¢- AaSaur& PaaQaR Mae é*<au )) 6 ))

dvau bhüta-sargau loke ’smin
daiva äsura eva ca
daivo vistaraçaù prokta
äsuraà pärtha me çåëu

SYNONYMS

dvau—two; bhüta-sargau—created living beings; loke—in the world;
asmin—this; daivaù—godly; äsuraù—demoniac; eva—certainly; ca—and;
daivaù—the divine; vistaraçaù—at great length; proktaù—said; äsuram—the
demoniac; pärtha—O son of Påthä; me—from Me; çåëu—just hear.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, in this world there are two kinds of created beings. One is

called the divine and the other demoniac. I have already explained to you at
length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of the demoniac.

PURPORT

Lord  Kåñëa,  having  assured  Arjuna  that  he  was  born  with  the  divine
qualities, is now describing the demoniac way. The conditioned living entities
are  divided  into  two  classes  in  this  world.  Those  who  are  born  with  divine
qualities follow a regulated life; that is to say they abide by the injunctions in
scriptures  and  by  the  authorities.  One  should  perform  duties  in  the  light  of
authoritative  scripture.  This  mentality  is  called  divine.  One  who  does  not
follow the regulative principles as they are laid down in the scriptures and who
acts  according  to  his  whims  is  called  demoniac  or  asuric.  There  is  no  other
criterion  but  obedience  to  the  regulative  principles  of  scriptures.  It  is
mentioned  in  Vedic  literature  that  both  the  demigods  and  the  demons  are
born  of  the  Prajäpati;  the  only  difference  is  that  one  class  obeys  the  Vedic
injunctions and the other does not.

TEXT

 7

Pa[v*ita& c iNav*ita& c JaNaa Na ivduraSaura" )

Na XaaEc& NaaiPa cacarae Na SaTYa& Taezu ivÛTae )) 7 ))

pravåttià ca nivåttià ca
janä na vidur äsuräù
na çaucaà näpi cäcäro
na satyaà teñu vidyate

SYNONYMS

pravåttim—acting properly; ca—also; nivåttim—not acting improperly;
ca—and; janäù—persons; na—never; viduù—know; äsuräù—of demoniac
quality; na—never; çaucam—cleanliness; na—nor; api—also; ca—and;
äcäraù—behavior; na—never; satyam—truth; teñu—in them; vidyate—there
is.

TRANSLATION

Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not to

be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is found in them.

PURPORT

In  every  civilized  human  society  there  is  some  set  of  scriptural  rules  and
regulations  which  is  followed  from  the  beginning.  Especially  among  the
Äryans, those who adopt the Vedic civilization and who are known as the most
advanced civilized peoples, those who do not follow the scriptural injunctions
are supposed to be demons. Therefore it is stated here that the demons do not
know  the  scriptural  rules,  nor  do  they  have  any  inclination  to  follow  them.
Most of them do not know them, and even if some of them know, they have
not the tendency to follow them. They have no faith, nor are they willing to
act  in  terms  of  the  Vedic  injunctions.  The  demons  are  not  clean,  either
externally or internally. One should always be careful to keep his body clean

by  bathing,  brushing  teeth,  shaving,  changing  clothes,  etc.  As  far  as  internal
cleanliness is concerned, one should always remember the holy names of God
and  chant  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa  Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,
Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare  Hare.  The  demons  neither  like  nor  follow  all
these rules for external and internal cleanliness.

As  for  behavior,  there  are  many  rules  and  regulations  guiding  human
behavior, such as the Manu-saàhitä, which is the law of the human race. Even
up  to  today,  those  who  are  Hindu  follow  the  Manu-saàhitä.  Laws  of
inheritance  and  other  legalities  are  derived  from  this  book.  Now,  in  the
Manu-saàhitä  it  is  clearly  stated  that  a  woman should not be given freedom.
That  does  not  mean  that  women  are  to  be  kept  as  slaves,  but  they  are  like
children.  Children  are  not  given  freedom,  but  that  does  not  mean  that  they
are kept as slaves. The demons have now neglected such injunctions, and they
think that women should be given as much freedom as men. However, this has
not improved the social condition of the world. Actually, a woman should be
given protection at every stage of life. She should be given protection by the
father in her younger days, by the husband in her youth, and by the grownup
sons  in  her  old  age.  This  is  proper  social  behavior  according  to  the
Manu-saàhitä.  But  modern  education  has  artificially  devised  a  puffed-up
concept  of  womanly  life,  and  therefore  marriage  is  practically  now  an
imagination in human society. Nor is the moral condition of woman very good
now. The demons, therefore, do not accept any instruction which is good for
society, and because they do not follow the experience of great sages and the
rules  and  regulations  laid  down  by  the  sages,  the  social  condition  of  the
demoniac people is very miserable.

TEXT  8

ASaTYaMaPa[iTaï& Tae JaGadahurNaqìrMa( )

AParSParSaM>aUTa& ik-MaNYaTk-aMahETauk-Ma( )) 8 ))

asatyam apratiñöhaà te
jagad ähur anéçvaram

aparaspara-sambhütaà
kim anyat käma-haitukam

SYNONYMS

asatyam—unreal; apratiñöham—without foundation; te—they; jagat—the
cosmic manifestation; ähuù—say; anéçvaram—with no controller;
aparaspara—without cause; sambhütam—arisen; kim anyat—there is no other
cause; käma-haitukam—it is due to lust only.

TRANSLATION

They say that this world is unreal, with no foundation, no God in control.

They say it is produced of sex desire and has no cause other than lust.

PURPORT

The demonic conclude that the world is phantasmagoria. There is no cause
and effect, no controller, no purpose: everything is unreal. They say that this
cosmic manifestation arises due to chance material actions and reactions. They
do  not  think  that  the  world  was  created  by  God  for  a  certain  purpose.  They
have their own theory: that the world has come about in its own way and that
there is no reason to believe that there is a God behind it. For them there is no
difference  between  spirit  and  matter,  and  they  do  not  accept  the  Supreme
Spirit.  Everything  is  matter  only,  and  the  whole  cosmos  is  supposed  to  be  a
mass  of  ignorance.  According  to  them,  everything  is  void,  and  whatever
manifestation  exists  is  due  to  our  ignorance  in  perception.  They  take  it  for
granted that all manifestation of diversity is a display of ignorance. Just as in a
dream  we  may  create  so  many  things  which  actually  have  no  existence,  so
when  we  are  awake  we  shall  see  that  everything  is  simply  a  dream.  But
factually, although the demons say that life is a dream, they are very expert in
enjoying  this  dream.  And  so,  instead  of  acquiring  knowledge,  they  become
more and more implicated in their dreamland. They conclude that as a child is
simply the result of sexual intercourse between man and woman, this world is

born  without  any  soul.  For  them  it  is  only  a  combination  of  matter  that  has
produced  the  living  entities,  and  there  is  no  question  of  the  existence  of  the
soul.  As  many  living  creatures  come  out  from  perspiration  and  from  a  dead
body  without any cause, the whole living world has come out of the material
combinations  of  the  cosmic  manifestation.  Therefore  material  nature  is  the
cause of this manifestation, and there is no other cause. They do not believe in
the  words  of  Kåñëa 
in  Bhagavad-gétä:  mayädhyakñeëa  prakåtiù  süyate
sa-caräcaram.  “Under  My  direction  the  whole  material  world  is  moving.”  In
other words, among the demons there is no perfect knowledge of the creation
of  the  world;  every  one  of  them  has  some  particular  theory  of  his  own.
According to them, one interpretation of the scriptures is as good as another,
for  they  do  not  believe  in  a  standard  understanding  of  the  scriptural
injunctions.

TEXT  9

WTaa& d*iíMaví>Ya NaíaTMaaNaae_LPabuÖYa" )

Pa[>avNTYauGa]k-MaaR<a" +aYaaYa JaGaTaae_ihTaa" )) 9 ))

etäà dåñöim avañöabhya
nañöätmäno ’lpa-buddhayaù
prabhavanty ugra-karmäëaù
kñayäya jagato ’hitäù

SYNONYMS

etäm—this; dåñöim—vision; avañöabhya—accepting; nañöa—having lost;
ätmänaù—themselves; alpa-buddhayaù—the less intelligent;
prabhavanti—flourish; ugra-karmäëaù—engaged in painful activities;
kñayäya—for destruction; jagataù—of the world; ahitäù—unbeneficial.

TRANSLATION

Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves and

who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible works meant to
destroy the world.

PURPORT

The  demoniac  are  engaged  in  activities  that  will  lead  the  world  to
destruction.  The  Lord  states  here  that  they  are  less  intelligent.  The
materialists, who have no concept of God, think that they are advancing. But
according  to  Bhagavad-gétä,  they  are  unintelligent  and  devoid  of  all  sense.
They try to enjoy this material world to the utmost limit and therefore always
engage  in  inventing  something  for  sense  gratification.  Such  materialistic
inventions  are  considered  to  be  advancement  of  human  civilization,  but  the
result  is  that  people  grow  more  and  more  violent  and  more  and  more  cruel,
cruel to animals and cruel to other human beings. They have no idea how to
behave  toward  one  another.  Animal  killing  is  very  prominent  amongst
demoniac people. Such people are considered the enemies of the world because
ultimately they will invent or create something which will bring destruction to
all.  Indirectly,  this  verse  anticipates  the  invention  of  nuclear  weapons,  of
which  the  whole  world  is  today  very  proud.  At  any  moment  war  may  take
place,  and  these  atomic  weapons  may  create  havoc.  Such  things  are  created
solely  for  the  destruction  of  the  world,  and  this  is  indicated  here.  Due  to
godlessness, such weapons are invented in human society; they are not meant
for the peace and prosperity of the world.

TEXT  10

k-aMaMaaié[TYa duZPaUr& dM>aMaaNaMadaiNvTaa" )

Maaehad(Ga*hqTvaSad(Ga]ahaNPa[vTaRNTae_éuicv]Taa" )) 10 ))

kämam äçritya duñpüraà
dambha-mäna-madänvitäù
mohäd gåhétväsad-grähän
pravartante ’çuci-vratäù

SYNONYMS

kämam—lust; äçritya—taking shelter of; duñpüram—insatiable; dambha—of
pride; mäna—and false prestige; mada-anvitäù—absorbed in the conceit;
mohät—by illusion; gåhétvä—taking; asat—nonpermanent; grähän—things;
pravartante—they flourish; açuci—to the unclean; vratäù—avowed.

TRANSLATION

Taking shelter of insatiable lust and absorbed in the conceit of pride and
false prestige, the demoniac, thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work,
attracted by the impermanent.

PURPORT

The  demoniac  mentality  is  described  here.  The  demons  have  no  satiation
for their lust. They will go on increasing and increasing their insatiable desires
for material enjoyment. Although they are always full of anxieties on account
of  accepting  nonpermanent  things,  they  still  continue  to  engage  in  such
activities out of illusion. They have no knowledge and cannot tell that they are
heading  the  wrong  way.  Accepting  nonpermanent  things,  such  demoniac
people create their own God, create their own hymns and chant accordingly.
The  result  is  that  they  become  more  and  more  attracted  to  two  things—sex
enjoyment  and  accumulation  of  material  wealth.  The  word  açuci-vratäù,
“unclean vows,” is very significant in this connection. Such demoniac people
are only attracted by wine, women, gambling and meat-eating; those are their
açuci,  unclean  habits.  Induced  by  pride  and  false  prestige,  they  create  some
principles  of  religion  which  are  not  approved  by  the  Vedic  injunctions.
Although such demoniac people are most abominable in the world, by artificial
means  the  world  creates  a  false  honor  for  them.  Although  they  are  gliding
toward hell, they consider themselves very much advanced.

TEXTS

 11–12

icNTaaMaPairMaeYaa& c Pa[l/YaaNTaaMauPaaié[Taa" )

k-aMaaePa>aaeGaParMaa WTaavidiTa iNaiêTaa" )) 11 ))

AaXaaPaaXaXaTaEbRÖa" k-aMa§-aeDaParaYa<aa" )

wRhNTae k-aMa>aaeGaaQaRMaNYaaYaeNaaQaRSaÄYaaNa( )) 12 ))

cintäm aparimeyäà ca
pralayäntäm upäçritäù
kämopabhoga-paramä
etävad iti niçcitäù

äçä-päça-çatair baddhäù
käma-krodha-paräyaëäù
éhante käma-bhogärtham
anyäyenärtha-saïcayän

SYNONYMS

cintäm—fears and anxieties; aparimeyäm—immeasurable; ca—and;
pralaya-antäm—unto the point of death; upäçritäù—having taken shelter of;
käma-upabhoga—sense gratification; paramäù—the highest goal of life;
etävat—thus; iti—in this way; niçcitäù—having ascertained;
äçä-päça—entanglements in a network of hope; çataiù—by hundreds;
baddhäù—being bound; käma—of lust; krodha—and anger;
paräyaëäù—always situated in the mentality; éhante—they desire; käma—lust;
bhoga—sense enjoyment; artham—for the purpose of; anyäyena—illegally;
artha—of wealth; saïcayän—accumulation.

TRANSLATION

They believe that to gratify the senses is the prime necessity of human
civilization. Thus until the end of life their anxiety is immeasurable. Bound by
a network of hundreds of thousands of desires and absorbed in lust and anger,
they secure money by illegal means for sense gratification.

PURPORT

The demoniac accept that the enjoyment of the senses is the ultimate goal
of life, and this concept they maintain until death. They do not believe in life
after death, and they do not believe that one takes on different types of bodies
according  to  one’s  karma,  or  activities  in  this  world.  Their  plans  for  life  are
never finished, and they go on preparing plan after plan, all of which are never
finished. We have personal experience of a person of such demoniac mentality
who,  even  at  the  point  of  death,  was  requesting  the  physician  to  prolong  his
life for four years more because his plans were not yet complete. Such foolish
people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life even for a moment.
When  the  notice  is  there,  there  is  no  consideration  of  the  man’s  desire.  The
laws of nature do not allow a second beyond what one is destined to enjoy.

The  demoniac  person,  who  has  no  faith  in  God  or  the  Supersoul  within
himself, performs all kinds of sinful activities simply for sense gratification. He
does not know that there is a witness sitting within his heart. The Supersoul is
observing the activities of the individual soul. As it is stated in the Upaniñads,
there are two birds sitting in one tree; one is acting and enjoying or suffering
the  fruits  of  the  branches,  and  the  other  is  witnessing.  But  one  who  is
demoniac has no knowledge of Vedic scripture, nor has he any faith; therefore
he  feels  free  to  do  anything  for  sense  enjoyment,  regardless  of  the
consequences.

TEXTS

 13–15

wdMaÛ MaYaa l/BDaiMaMa& Pa[aPSYae MaNaaerQaMa( )

wdMaSTaqdMaiPa Mae >aivZYaiTa PauNaDaRNaMa( )) 13 ))

ASaaE MaYaa hTa" Xa}auhRiNaZYae caParaNaiPa )

wRìrae_hMah& >aaeGaq iSaÖae_h& bl/vaNSau%q )) 14 ))

Aa!yae_i>aJaNavaNaiSMa k-ae_NYaae_iSTa Sad*Xaae MaYaa )

Ya+Yae daSYaaiMa MaaeidZYa wTYajaNaivMaaeihTaa" )) 15 ))

idam adya mayä labdham
imaà präpsye manoratham
idam astédam api me
bhaviñyati punar dhanam

asau mayä hataù çatrur
haniñye cäparän api
éçvaro ’ham ahaà bhogé
siddho ’haà balavän sukhé

äòhyo ’bhijanavän asmi
ko ’nyo ’sti sadåço mayä
yakñye däsyämi modiñya
ity ajïäna-vimohitäù

SYNONYMS

idam—this; adya—today; mayä—by me; labdham—gained; imam—this;
präpsye—I shall gain; manaù-ratham—according to my desires; idam—this;
asti—there is; idam—this; api—also; me—mine; bhaviñyati—it will increase in
the future; punaù—again; dhanam—wealth; asau—that; mayä—by me;
hataù—has been killed; çatruù—enemy; haniñye—I shall kill; ca—also;
aparän—others; api—certainly; éçvaraù—the lord; aham—I am; aham—I am;
bhogé—the enjoyer; siddhaù—perfect; aham—I am; bala-vän—powerful;
sukhé—happy; äòhyaù—wealthy; abhijana-vän—surrounded by aristocratic
relatives; asmi—I am; kaù—who; anyaù—other; asti—there is; sadåçaù—like;
mayä—me; yakñye—I shall sacrifice; däsyämi—I shall give charity; modiñye—I
shall rejoice; iti—thus; ajïäna—by ignorance; vimohitäù—deluded.

TRANSLATION

The demoniac person thinks: “So much wealth do I have today, and I will
gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase

in the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I have killed him, and my
other enemies will also be killed. I am the lord of everything. I am the enjoyer. I
am perfect, powerful and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by
aristocratic relatives. There is none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall
perform sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice.” In this
way, such persons are deluded by ignorance.

TEXT  16

ANaek-ictaiv>a]aNTaa MaaehJaal/SaMaav*Taa" )

Pa[Sa¢-a" k-aMa>aaeGaezu PaTaiNTa Narke-_éucaE )) 16 ))

aneka-citta-vibhräntä
moha-jäla-samävåtäù
prasaktäù käma-bhogeñu
patanti narake ’çucau

SYNONYMS

aneka—numerous; citta—by anxieties; vibhräntäù—perplexed; moha—of
illusions; jäla—by a network; samävåtäù—surrounded; prasaktäù—attached;
käma-bhogeñu—to sense gratification; patanti—they glide down; narake—into
hell; açucau—unclean.

TRANSLATION

Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of illusions,
they become too strongly attached to sense enjoyment and fall down into hell.

PURPORT

The demoniac man knows no limit to his desire to acquire money. That is
unlimited.  He  thinks  only  of  how  much  assessment  he  has  just  now  and
schemes to engage that stock of wealth further and further. For that reason, he

does not hesitate to act in any sinful way and so deals in the black market for
illegal gratification. He is enamored by the possessions he has already, such as
land,  family,  house  and  bank  balance,  and  he  is  always  planning  to  improve
them. He believes in his own strength, and he does not know that whatever he
is  gaining  is  due  to  his  past  good  deeds.  He  is  given  an  opportunity  to
accumulate  such  things,  but  he  has  no  conception  of  past  causes.  He  simply
thinks  that  all  his  mass  of  wealth  is  due  to  his  own  endeavor.  A  demoniac
person believes in the strength of his personal work, not in the law of karma.
According  to  the  law  of  karma,  a  man  takes  his  birth  in  a  high  family,  or
becomes rich, or very well educated, or very beautiful because of good work in
the  past.  The  demoniac  think  that  all  these  things  are  accidental  and  due  to
the  strength  of  one’s  personal  ability.  They  do  not  sense  any  arrangement
behind  all  the  varieties  of  people,  beauty  and  education.  Anyone  who  comes
into  competition  with  such  a  demoniac  man  is  his  enemy.  There  are  many
demoniac people, and each is enemy to the others. This enmity becomes more
and  more  deep—between  persons,  then  between  families,  then  between
societies,  and  at  last  between  nations.  Therefore  there  is  constant  strife,  war
and enmity all over the world.

Each demoniac person thinks that he can live at the sacrifice of all others.
Generally,  a  demoniac  person  thinks  of  himself  as  the  Supreme  God,  and  a
demoniac  preacher  tells  his  followers:  “Why  are  you  seeking  God  elsewhere?
You  are  all  yourselves  God!  Whatever  you  like,  you  can  do.  Don’t  believe  in
God. Throw away God. God is dead.” These are the demoniac’s preachings.

Although  the  demoniac  person  sees  others equally rich and influential, or
even more so, he thinks that no one is richer than he and that no one is more
influential  than  he.  As  far  as  promotion  to  the  higher  planetary  system  is
concerned,  he  does  not  believe  in  performing  yajïas,  or  sacrifices.  Demons
think that they will manufacture their own process of yajïa and prepare some
machine  by  which  they  will  be  able  to  reach  any  higher  planet.  The  best
example  of  such  a  demoniac  man  was  Rävaëa.  He  offered  a  program  to  the
people by which he would prepare a staircase so that anyone could reach the
heavenly  planets  without  performing  sacrifices,  such  as  are  prescribed  in  the
Vedas.  Similarly,  in  the  present  age  such  demoniac men are striving to reach

the higher planetary systems by mechanical arrangements. These are examples
of bewilderment. The result is that, without their knowledge, they are gliding
toward hell. Here the Sanskrit word moha-jäla is very significant. Jäla means
“net”; like fish caught in a net, they have no way to come out.

TEXT  17

AaTMaSaM>aaivTaa" STaBDaa DaNaMaaNaMadaiNvTaa" )

YaJaNTae NaaMaYajESTae dM>aeNaaiviDaPaUvRk-Ma( )) 17 ))

ätma-sambhävitäù stabdhä
dhana-mäna-madänvitäù
yajante näma-yajïais te
dambhenävidhi-pürvakam

SYNONYMS

ätma-sambhävitäù—self-complacent; stabdhäù—impudent; dhana-mäna—of
wealth and false prestige; mada—in the delusion; anvitäù—absorbed;
yajante—they perform sacrifice; näma—in name only; yajïaiù—with
sacrifices; te—they; dambhena—out of pride; avidhi-pürvakam—without
following any rules and regulations.

TRANSLATION

Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false prestige,
they sometimes proudly perform sacrifices in name only, without following any
rules or regulations.

PURPORT

Thinking themselves all in all, not caring for any authority or scripture, the
demoniac  sometimes  perform  so-called  religious  or  sacrificial  rites.  And  since
they do not believe in authority, they are very impudent. This is due to illusion

caused  by  accumulating  some  wealth  and  false  prestige.  Sometimes  such
demons take up the role of preacher, mislead the people, and become known as
religious reformers or as incarnations of God. They make a show of performing
sacrifices,  or  they  worship  the  demigods,  or  manufacture  their  own  God.
Common  men  advertise  them  as  God  and  worship  them,  and  by  the  foolish
they are considered advanced in the principles of religion, or in the principles
of spiritual knowledge. They take the dress of the renounced order of life and
engage in all nonsense in that dress. Actually there are so many restrictions for
one who has renounced this world. The demons, however, do not care for such
restrictions. They think that whatever path one can create is one’s own path;
there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  standard  path  one  has  to  follow.  The  word
avidhi-pürvakam,  meaning  a  disregard  for  the  rules  and  regulations,  is
especially stressed here. These things are always due to ignorance and illusion.

TEXT  18

Ahªar& bl&/ dPa| k-aMa& §-aeDa& c Sa&ié[Taa" )

MaaMaaTMaPardehezu Pa[iÜzNTaae_>YaSaUYak-a" )) 18 ))

ahaìkäraà balaà darpaà
kämaà krodhaà ca saàçritäù
mäm ätma-para-deheñu
pradviñanto ’bhyasüyakäù

SYNONYMS

ahaìkäram—false ego; balam—strength; darpam—pride; kämam—lust;
krodham—anger; ca—also; saàçritäù—having taken shelter of; mäm—Me;
ätma—in their own; para—and in other; deheñu—bodies;
pradviñantaù—blaspheming; abhyasüyakäù—envious.

TRANSLATION

Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demons become

envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in their own
bodies and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme against the real religion.

PURPORT

A demoniac person, being always against God’s supremacy, does not like to
believe in the scriptures. He is envious of both the scriptures and the existence
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is caused by his so-called prestige
and  his  accumulation  of  wealth  and  strength.  He  does  not  know  that  the
present life is a preparation for the next life. Not knowing this, he is actually
envious  of  his  own  self,  as  well  as  of  others.  He  commits  violence  on  other
bodies  and  on  his  own.  He  does  not  care  for  the  supreme  control  of  the
Personality  of  Godhead,  because  he  has  no  knowledge.  Being  envious  of  the
scriptures  and  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  he  puts  forward  false
arguments against the existence of God and denies the scriptural authority. He
thinks himself independent and powerful in every action. He thinks that since
no one can equal him in strength, power or wealth, he can act in any way and
no one can stop him. If he has an enemy who might check the advancement of
his sensual activities, he makes plans to cut him down by his own power.

TEXT  19

TaaNah& iÜzTa" §U-raNSa&Saarezu NaraDaMaaNa( )

i+aPaaMYaJaóMaéu>aaNaaSaurqZvev YaaeiNazu )) 19 ))

tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu

SYNONYMS

tän—those; aham—I; dviñataù—envious; krürän—mischievous;
saàsäreñu—into the ocean of material existence; nara-adhamän—the lowest

of mankind; kñipämi—I put; ajasram—forever; açubhän—inauspicious;
äsuréñu—demoniac; eva—certainly; yoniñu—into the wombs.

TRANSLATION

Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, I

perpetually cast into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac
species of life.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly indicated that the placing of a particular individual
soul in a particular body is the prerogative of the supreme will. The demoniac
person may not agree to accept the supremacy of the Lord, and it is a fact that
he  may  act  according  to  his  own  whims,  but  his next birth will depend upon
the decision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and not on himself. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Third Canto, it is stated that an individual soul, after his
death, is put into the womb of a mother where he gets a particular type of body
under  the  supervision  of  superior  power.  Therefore  in  the  material  existence
we  find  so  many  species  of  life—animals,  insects,  men,  and  so  on.  All  are
arranged by the superior power. They are not accidental. As for the demoniac,
it is clearly said here that they are perpetually put into the wombs of demons,
and thus they continue to be envious, the lowest of mankind. Such demoniac
species of men are held to be always full of lust, always violent and hateful and
always  unclean.  The  many  kinds  of  hunters  in  the  jungle  are  considered  to
belong to the demoniac species of life.

TEXT  20

AaSaurq& YaaeiNaMaaPaàa MaU!a JaNMaiNaJaNMaiNa )

MaaMaPa[aPYaEv k-aENTaeYa TaTaae YaaNTYaDaMaa& GaiTaMa( )) 20 ))

äsuréà yonim äpannä
müòhä janmani janmani

mäm apräpyaiva kaunteya
tato yänty adhamäà gatim

SYNONYMS

äsurém—demoniac; yonim—species; äpannäù—gaining; müòhäù—the foolish;
janmani janmani—in birth after birth; mäm—Me; apräpya—without
achieving; eva—certainly; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; tataù—thereafter;
yänti—go; adhamäm—condemned; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, O son of
Kunté, such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the
most abominable type of existence.

PURPORT

It  is  known  that  God  is  all-merciful,  but  here  we  find  that  God  is  never
merciful  to  the  demoniac.  It  is  clearly  stated  that  the  demoniac  people,  life
after  life,  are  put  into  the  wombs  of  similar  demons,  and,  not  achieving  the
mercy  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  they  go  down  and  down,  so  that  at  last  they
achieve  bodies  like  those  of  cats,  dogs  and  hogs.  It  is  clearly  stated  that  such
demons have practically no chance of receiving the mercy of God at any stage
of  later  life.  In  the  Vedas  also  it  is  stated  that  such  persons  gradually  sink  to
become  dogs  and  hogs.  It  may  be  then  argued  in  this  connection  that  God
should not be advertised as all-merciful if He is not merciful to such demons.
In answer to this question, in the Vedänta-sütra we find that the Supreme Lord
has no hatred for anyone. The placing of the asuras, the demons, in the lowest
status of life is simply another feature of His mercy. Sometimes the asuras are
killed by the Supreme Lord, but this killing is also good for them, for in Vedic
literature  we  find  that  anyone  who  is  killed  by  the  Supreme  Lord  becomes
liberated.  There  are  instances  in  history  of  many  asuras—Rävaëa,  Kaàsa,
Hiraëyakaçipu—to  whom  the  Lord  appeared  in  various  incarnations  just  to

kill them. Therefore God’s mercy is shown to the asuras if they are fortunate
enough to be killed by Him.

TEXT  21

i}aivDa& Nark-SYaed& Üar& NaaXaNaMaaTMaNa" )

k-aMa" §-aeDaSTaQaa l/ae>aSTaSMaadeTaT}aYa& TYaJaeTa( )) 21 ))

tri-vidhaà narakasyedaà
dväraà näçanam ätmanaù
kämaù krodhas tathä lobhas
tasmäd etat trayaà tyajet

SYNONYMS

tri-vidham—of three kinds; narakasya—of hell; idam—this; dväram—gate;
näçanam—destructive; ätmanaù—of the self; kämaù—lust; krodhaù—anger;
tathä—as well as; lobhaù—greed; tasmät—therefore; etat—these;
trayam—three; tyajet—one must give up.

TRANSLATION

There are three gates leading to this hell—lust, anger and greed. Every sane

man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul.

PURPORT

The beginning of demoniac life is described herein. One tries to satisfy his
lust,  and  when  he  cannot,  anger  and  greed  arise.  A  sane  man  who  does  not
want  to  glide  down  to  the  species  of  demoniac  life  must  try  to  give  up  these
three enemies, which can kill the self to such an extent that there will be no
possibility of liberation from this material entanglement.

TEXT  22

WTaEivRMau¢-" k-aENTaeYa TaMaaeÜarEiñi>aNaRr" )

AacrTYaaTMaNa" é[eYaSTaTaae YaaiTa Para& GaiTaMa( )) 22 ))

etair vimuktaù kaunteya
tamo-dvärais tribhir naraù
äcaraty ätmanaù çreyas
tato yäti paräà gatim

SYNONYMS

etaiù—from these; vimuktaù—being liberated; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
tamaù-dväraiù—from the gates of ignorance; tribhiù—of three kinds; naraù—a
person; äcarati—performs; ätmanaù—for the self; çreyaù—benediction;
tataù—thereafter; yäti—he goes; paräm—to the supreme; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kunté, performs

acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attains the supreme
destination.

PURPORT

One should be very careful of these three enemies to human life: lust, anger
and greed. The more a person is freed from lust, anger and greed, the more his
existence becomes pure. Then he can follow the rules and regulations enjoined
in  the  Vedic  literature.  By  following  the  regulative  principles  of  human  life,
one gradually raises himself to the platform of spiritual realization. If one is so
fortunate,  by  such  practice,  to  rise  to  the  platform  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,
then success is guaranteed for him. In the Vedic literature, the ways of action
and reaction are prescribed to enable one to come to the stage of purification.
The whole method is based on giving up lust, greed and anger. By cultivating
knowledge  of  this  process,  one  can  be  elevated  to  the  highest  position  of

self-realization;  this  self-realization  is  perfected  in  devotional  service.  In  that
devotional  service,  the  liberation  of  the  conditioned  soul  is  guaranteed.
Therefore, according to the Vedic system, there are instituted the four orders
of  life  and  the  four  statuses  of  life,  called  the  caste  system  and  the  spiritual
order  system.  There  are  different  rules and regulations for different castes or
divisions  of  society,  and  if  a  person  is  able  to  follow  them,  he  will  be
automatically  raised  to  the  highest  platform  of  spiritual  realization.  Then  he
can have liberation without a doubt.

TEXT  23

Ya" XaañiviDaMauTSa*JYa vTaRTae k-aMak-arTa" )

Na Sa iSaiÖMavaPanaeiTa Na Sau%& Na Para& GaiTaMa( )) 23 ))

yaù çästra-vidhim utsåjya
vartate käma-kärataù
na sa siddhim aväpnoti
na sukhaà na paräà gatim

SYNONYMS

yaù—anyone who; çästra-vidhim—the regulations of the scriptures;
utsåjya—giving up; vartate—remains; käma-kärataù—acting whimsically in
lust; na—never; saù—he; siddhim—perfection; aväpnoti—achieves;
na—never; sukham—happiness; na—never; paräm—the supreme;
gatim—perfectional stage.

TRANSLATION

He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims

attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.

PURPORT

As described before, the çästra-vidhi, or the direction of the çästra, is given
to  the  different  castes  and  orders  of  human  society.  Everyone  is  expected  to
follow  these  rules  and  regulations.  If  one  does  not  follow  them  and  acts
whimsically  according  to  his  lust,  greed  and  desire,  then  he  never  will  be
perfect  in  his  life.  In  other  words,  a  man  may  theoretically  know  all  these
things, but if he does not apply them in his own life, then he is to be known as
the lowest of mankind. In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to
be sane and to follow the regulations given for elevating his life to the highest
platform, but if he does not follow them, then he degrades himself. But even if
he follows the rules and regulations and moral principles and ultimately does
not  come  to  the  stage  of  understanding  the  Supreme  Lord,  then  all  his
knowledge becomes spoiled. And even if he accepts the existence of God, if he
does  not  engage  himself  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  his  attempts  are  spoiled.
Therefore  one  should  gradually  raise  himself  to  the  platform  of  Kåñëa
consciousness  and  devotional  service;  it  is  then  and  there  that  he  can  attain
the highest perfectional stage, not otherwise.

The  word  käma-kärataù  is  very  significant.  A  person  who  knowingly
violates the rules acts in lust. He knows that this is forbidden, but still he acts.
This is called acting whimsically. He knows that this should be done, but still
he does not do it; therefore he is called whimsical. Such persons are destined to
be condemned by the Supreme Lord. Such persons cannot have the perfection
which  is  meant  for  the  human  life.  The  human  life  is  especially  meant  for
purifying  one’s  existence,  and  one  who  does  not  follow  the  rules  and
regulations  cannot  purify  himself,  nor  can  he  attain  the  real  stage  of
happiness.

TEXT  24

TaSMaaC^añ& Pa[Maa<a& Tae k-aYaaRk-aYaRVYaviSQaTaaE )

jaTva XaañivDaaNaae¢&- k-MaR k-TauRiMahahRiSa )) 24 ))

tasmäc chästraà pramäëaà te

käryäkärya-vyavasthitau
jïätvä çästra-vidhänoktaà
karma kartum ihärhasi

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; çästram—the scriptures; pramäëam—evidence; te—your;
kärya—duty; akärya—and forbidden activities; vyavasthitau—in determining;
jïätvä—knowing; çästra—of scripture; vidhäna—the regulations; uktam—as
declared; karma—work; kartum—do; iha—in this world; arhasi—you should.

TRANSLATION

One should therefore understand what is duty and what is not duty by the
regulations of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should
act so that he may gradually be elevated.

PURPORT

As  stated  in  the  Fifteenth  Chapter,  all  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the
Vedas  are  meant  for  knowing  Kåñëa.  If  one  understands  Kåñëa  from  the
Bhagavad-gétä and becomes situated in Kåñëa consciousness, engaging himself
in  devotional  service,  he  has  reached  the  highest  perfection  of  knowledge
offered by the Vedic literature. Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu made this process
very  easy:  He  asked  people  simply  to  chant  Hare  Kåñëa,  Hare  Kåñëa,  Kåñëa
Kåñëa,  Hare  Hare/  Hare  Räma,  Hare  Räma,  Räma  Räma,  Hare  Hare  and  to
engage in the devotional service of the Lord and eat the remnants of foodstuff
offered  to  the  Deity.  One  who  is  directly  engaged  in  all  these  devotional
activities  is  to  be  understood  as  having  studied  all  Vedic  literature.  He  has
come to the conclusion perfectly. Of course, for the ordinary persons who are
not in Kåñëa consciousness or who are not engaged in devotional service, what
is to be done and what is not to be done must be decided by the injunctions of
the  Vedas.  One  should  act  accordingly,  without  argument.  That  is  called
following  the  principles  of  çästra,  or  scripture.  Çästra  is  without  the  four

principal defects that are visible in the conditioned soul: imperfect senses, the
propensity  for  cheating,  certainty  of  committing  mistakes,  and  certainty  of
being illusioned. These four principal defects in conditioned life disqualify one
from putting forth rules and regulations. Therefore, the rules and regulations
as  described  in  the  çästra—being  above  these  defects—are  accepted  without
alteration by all great saints, äcäryas and great souls.

In  India  there  are  many  parties  of  spiritual  understanding,  generally
classified as two: the impersonalist and the personalist. Both of them, however,
lead their lives according to the principles of the Vedas. Without following the
principles  of  the  scriptures,  one  cannot  elevate  himself  to  the  perfectional
stage.  One  who  actually,  therefore,  understands  the  purport  of  the  çästras  is
considered fortunate.

In human society, aversion to the principles of understanding the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  cause  of  all  falldowns.  That  is  the  greatest
offense  of  human  life.  Therefore,  mäyä,  the  material  energy  of  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  is  always  giving  us  trouble  in  the  shape  of  the
threefold  miseries.  This  material  energy  is  constituted  of  the  three  modes  of
material  nature.  One  has  to  raise  himself  at  least  to  the  mode  of  goodness
before the path to understanding the Supreme Lord can be opened. Without
raising  oneself  to  the  standard  of  the  mode  of  goodness,  one  remains  in
ignorance  and  passion,  which  are  the  cause  of  demoniac  life.  Those  in  the
modes of passion and ignorance deride the scriptures, deride the holy man, and
deride the proper understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They
disobey  the  instructions  of  the  spiritual  master,  and  they  do  not  care  for  the
regulations  of  the  scriptures.  In  spite  of  hearing  the  glories  of  devotional
service,  they  are  not  attracted.  Thus  they  manufacture  their  own  way  of
elevation.  These  are  some  of  the  defects  of  human  society  which  lead  to  the
demoniac  status  of  life.  If,  however,  one  is  able  to  be  guided  by  a  proper  and
bona  fide  spiritual  master,  who  can  lead  one  to  the  path  of  elevation,  to  the
higher stage, then one’s life becomes successful.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixteenth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of the Divine and Demoniac Natures.

- CHAPTER 17 -
The Divisions of Faith

TEXT  1

AJauRNa ovac )

Yae XaañiviDaMauTSa*JYa YaJaNTae é[ÖYaaiNvTaa" )

Taeza& iNaïa Tau k-a k*-Z<a SatvMaahae rJaSTaMa" )) 1 ))

arjuna uväca
ye çästra-vidhim utsåjya
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
teñäà niñöhä tu kä kåñëa
sattvam äho rajas tamaù

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; ye—those who; çästra-vidhim—the regulations of
scripture; utsåjya—giving up; yajante—worship; çraddhayä—full faith;
anvitäù—possessed of; teñäm—of them; niñöhä—the faith; tu—but; kä—what;
kåñëa—O Kåñëa; sattvam—in goodness; äho—or else; rajaù—in passion;
tamaù—in ignorance.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O Kåñëa, what is the situation of those who do not follow
the principles of scripture but worship according to their own imagination? Are

they in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?

PURPORT

In the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person faithful to
a  particular  type  of  worship  gradually  becomes  elevated  to  the  stage  of
knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage of peace and prosperity.
In  the  Sixteenth  Chapter,  it  is  concluded  that  one  who  does  not  follow  the
principles laid down in the scriptures is called an asura, demon, and one who
follows the scriptural injunctions faithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now,
if one, with faith, follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scriptural
injunctions,  what  is  his  position?  This  doubt  of  Arjuna’s  is  to  be  cleared  by
Kåñëa. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting a human being and
placing  their  faith  in  him  worshiping  in  goodness,  passion  or  ignorance?  Do
such persons attain the perfectional stage of life? Is it possible for them to be
situated in real knowledge and elevate themselves to the highest perfectional
stage?  Do  those  who  do  not  follow  the rules and regulations of the scriptures
but  who  have  faith  in  something  and  worship  gods  and  demigods  and  men
attain success in their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Kåñëa.

TEXT

 2

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

i}aivDaa >aviTa é[Öa deihNaa& Saa Sv>aavJaa )

Saaitvk-I raJaSaq cEv TaaMaSaq ceiTa Taa& é*<au )) 2 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
tri-vidhä bhavati çraddhä
dehinäà sä svabhäva-jä
sättviké räjasé caiva
tämasé ceti täà çåëu

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidhä—of
three kinds; bhavati—becomes; çraddhä—the faith; dehinäm—of the
embodied; sä—that; sva-bhäva-jä—according to his mode of material nature;
sättviké—in the mode of goodness; räjasé—in the mode of passion; ca—also;
eva—certainly; tämasé—in the mode of ignorance; ca—and; iti—thus;
täm—that; çåëu—hear from Me.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: According to the modes of nature

acquired by the embodied soul, one’s faith can be of three kinds—in goodness,
in passion or in ignorance. Now hear about this.

PURPORT

Those  who  know  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  scriptures  but  out  of
laziness  or  indolence  give  up  following  these  rules  and  regulations  are
governed  by  the  modes  of  material  nature.  According  to  their  previous
activities in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, they acquire a nature
which  is  of  a  specific  quality.  The  association  of  the  living  entity  with  the
different modes of nature has been going on perpetually; since the living entity
is  in  contact  with  material  nature,  he  acquires  different  types  of  mentality
according  to  his  association  with  the  material  modes.  But  this  nature  can  be
changed  if  one  associates  with  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master  and  abides  by  his
rules  and  the  scriptures.  Gradually,  one  can  change  his  position  from
ignorance  to  goodness,  or  from  passion  to  goodness.  The  conclusion  is  that
blind  faith  in  a  particular  mode  of  nature  cannot  help  a  person  become
elevated  to  the  perfectional  stage.  One  has  to  consider  things  carefully,  with
intelligence,  in  the  association  of  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master.  Thus  one  can
change his position to a higher mode of nature.

TEXT  3

SatvaNauæPaa SavRSYa é[Öa >aviTa >aarTa )

é[ÖaMaYaae_Ya& Pauåzae Yaae YaC^\Ö" Sa Wv Sa" )) 3 ))

sattvänurüpä sarvasya
çraddhä bhavati bhärata
çraddhä-mayo ’yaà puruño
yo yac-chraddhaù sa eva saù

SYNONYMS

sattva-anurüpä—according to the existence; sarvasya—of everyone;
çraddhä—faith; bhavati—becomes; bhärata—O son of Bharata;
çraddhä—faith; mayaù—full of; ayam—this; puruñaù—living entity;
yaù—who; yat—having which; çraddhaù—faith; saù—thus; eva—certainly;
saù—he.

TRANSLATION

O son of Bharata, according to one’s existence under the various modes of
nature, one evolves a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a
particular faith according to the modes he has acquired.

PURPORT

Everyone  has  a  particular  type  of  faith,  regardless  of  what  he  is.  But  his
faith is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to the nature he has
acquired.  Thus,  according  to  his  particular  type  of  faith,  one  associates  with
certain persons. Now the real fact is that every living being, as is stated in the
Fifteenth  Chapter,  is  originally  a  fragmental  part  and  parcel  of  the  Supreme
Lord.  Therefore  one  is  originally  transcendental  to  all  the  modes  of  material
nature. But when one forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and comes into contact with the material nature in conditional life,

he  generates  his  own  position  by  association  with  the  different  varieties  of
material nature. The resultant artificial faith and existence are only material.
Although  one  may  be  conducted  by  some  impression,  or  some  conception  of
life,  originally  he  is  nirguëa, or transcendental. Therefore one has to become
cleansed of the material contamination that he has acquired, in order to regain
his  relationship  with  the  Supreme  Lord.  That  is  the  only  path  back  without
fear: Kåñëa consciousness. If one is situated in Kåñëa consciousness, then that
path is guaranteed for his elevation to the perfectional stage. If one does not
take  to  this  path  of  self-realization,  then  he  is  surely  to  be  conducted  by  the
influence of the modes of nature.

The  word  çraddhä,  or  “faith,”  is  very  significant  in  this  verse.  Çraddhä,  or
faith,  originally  comes  out  of  the  mode  of  goodness.  One’s  faith  may  be  in  a
demigod or some created God or some mental concoction. One’s strong faith is
supposed  to  be  productive  of  works  of  material  goodness.  But  in  material
conditional  life,  no  works  are  completely  purified.  They  are  mixed.  They  are
not  in  pure  goodness.  Pure  goodness  is  transcendental;  in  purified  goodness
one  can  understand  the  real  nature  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.
As  long  as  one’s  faith  is  not  completely  in  purified  goodness,  the  faith  is
subject  to  contamination  by  any  of  the  modes  of  material  nature.  The
contaminated  modes  of  material  nature  expand  to  the  heart.  Therefore
according  to  the  position  of  the  heart  in  contact  with  a  particular  mode  of
material nature, one’s faith is established. It should be understood that if one’s
heart is in the mode of goodness his faith is also in the mode of goodness. If his
heart is in the mode of passion, his faith is also in the mode of passion. And if
his  heart  is  in  the  mode  of  darkness,  illusion,  his  faith  is  also  thus
contaminated.  Thus  we  find  different  types  of  faith  in  this  world,  and  there
are  different  types  of  religions  due  to  different  types  of  faith.  The  real
principle  of  religious  faith  is  situated  in  the  mode  of  pure  goodness,  but
because the heart is tainted we find different types of religious principles. Thus
according to different types of faith, there are different kinds of worship.

TEXT

 4

YaJaNTae Saaitvk-a devaNYa+ar+aa&iSa raJaSaa" )

Pa[eTaaN>aUTaGa<aa&êaNYae YaJaNTae TaaMaSaa JaNaa" )) 4 ))

yajante sättvikä devän
yakña-rakñäàsi räjasäù
pretän bhüta-gaëäàç cänye
yajante tämasä janäù

SYNONYMS

yajante—worship; sättvikäù—those who are in the mode of goodness;
devän—demigods; yakña-rakñäàsi—demons; räjasäù—those who are in the
mode of passion; pretän—spirits of the dead; bhüta-gaëän—ghosts; ca—and;
anye—others; yajante—worship; tämasäù—in the mode of ignorance;
janäù—people.

TRANSLATION

Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of
passion worship the demons; and those in the mode of ignorance worship ghosts
and spirits.

PURPORT

In this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different kinds
of  worshipers  according  to  their  external  activities.  According  to  scriptural
injunction, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshipable, but those
who  are  not  very  conversant  with,  or  faithful  to,  the  scriptural  injunctions
worship different objects, according to their specific situations in the modes of
material  nature.  Those  who  are  situated  in  goodness  generally  worship  the
demigods.  The  demigods  include  Brahmä,  Çiva  and  others  such  as  Indra,
Candra  and  the  sun-god.  There  are  various  demigods.  Those  in  goodness
worship a particular demigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are
in the mode of passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second

World War a man in Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war he
had  amassed  a  large  amount  of  wealth  by  dealing  in  the  black  market.
Similarly,  those  in  the  modes  of  passion  and  ignorance  generally  select  a
powerful  man  to  be  God.  They  think  that  anyone  can  be  worshiped  as  God
and that the same results will be obtained.

Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode of passion
worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of ignorance, in
darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship at the tomb of some
dead  man.  Sexual  service  is  also  considered  to  be  in  the  mode  of  darkness.
Similarly, in remote villages in India there are worshipers of ghosts. We have
seen that in India the lower-class people sometimes go to the forest, and if they
have  knowledge  that  a  ghost  lives  in  a  tree,  they  worship  that  tree  and  offer
sacrifices. These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship. God
worship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in pure goodness. In
the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam 
viçuddhaà
vasudeva-çabditam:  “When  a  man  is  situated  in  pure  goodness,  he  worships
Väsudeva.”  The  purport  is  that  those  who  are  completely  purified  of  the
material  modes  of  nature  and  who  are  transcendentally  situated  can  worship
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

(4.3.23) 

sattvaà 

said, 

it 

is 

The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness, and
they worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonal Viñëu form
in  the  material  world,  which  is  known  as  philosophized  Viñëu.  Viñëu  is  the
expansion  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  but  the  impersonalists,
because they do not ultimately believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
imagine that the Viñëu form is just another aspect of the impersonal Brahman;
similarly,  they  imagine  that  Lord  Brahmä  is  the  impersonal  form  in  the
material mode of passion. Thus they sometimes describe five kinds of gods that
are  worshipable,  but  because  they  think  that  the  actual  truth  is  impersonal
Brahman,  they  dispose  of  all  worshipable  objects  at  the  ultimate  end.  In
conclusion,  the  different  qualities  of  the  material  modes  of  nature  can  be
purified through association with persons who are of transcendental nature.

TEXTS

 5–6

AXaañivihTa& gaaer& TaPYaNTae Yae TaPaae JaNaa" )

dM>aahªarSa&Yau¢-a" k-aMaraGabl/aiNvTaa" )) 5 ))

k-zRYaNTa" XarqrSQa& >aUTaGa]aMaMaceTaSa" )

Maa& cEvaNTa" XarqrSQa& TaaiNvÖyaSauriNaêYaaNa( )) 6 ))

açästra-vihitaà ghoraà
tapyante ye tapo janäù
dambhähaìkära-saàyuktäù
käma-räga-balänvitäù

karñayantaù çaréra-sthaà
bhüta-grämam acetasaù
mäà caiväntaù çaréra-sthaà
tän viddhy äsura-niçcayän

SYNONYMS

açästra—not in the scriptures; vihitam—directed; ghoram—harmful to others;
tapyante—undergo; ye—those who; tapaù—austerities; janäù—persons;
dambha—with pride; ahaìkära—and egoism; saàyuktäù—engaged; käma—of
lust; räga—and attachment; bala—by the force; anvitäù—impelled;
karñayantaù—tormenting; çaréra-stham—situated within the body;
bhüta-grämam—the combination of material elements; acetasaù—having a
misled mentality; mäm—Me; ca—also; eva—certainly; antaù—within;
çaréra-stham—situated in the body; tän—them; viddhi—understand;
äsura-niçcayän—demons.

TRANSLATION

Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in the

scriptures, performing them out of pride and egoism, who are impelled by lust
and attachment, who are foolish and who torture the material elements of the
body as well as the Supersoul dwelling within, are to be known as demons.

PURPORT

There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penance which
are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting for some
ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end, is not mentioned in
the  scriptural  directions.  The  scriptures  recommend  fasting  for  spiritual
advancement, not for some political end or social purpose. Persons who take to
such austerities are, according to Bhagavad-gétä, certainly demoniac. Their acts
are against the scriptural injunctions and are not beneficial for the people in
general.  Actually,  they  act  out  of  pride,  false  ego,  lust  and  attachment  for
material enjoyment. By such activities, not only is the combination of material
elements  of  which  the  body  is  constructed  disturbed,  but  also  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  Himself  living  within  the  body.  Such  unauthorized
fasting  or  austerities  for  some  political  end  are  certainly  very  disturbing  to
others.  They  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Vedic  literature.  A  demoniac  person
may  think  that  he  can  force  his  enemy  or  other  parties  to  comply  with  his
desire by this method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are
not approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that those
who  engage  in  them  are  demons.  Such  demonstrations  are  insults  to  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience to
the  Vedic  scriptural  injunctions.  The  word  acetasaù  is  significant  in  this
connection.  Persons  of  normal  mental  condition  must  obey  the  scriptural
injunctions.  Those  who  are  not  in  such  a  position  neglect  and  disobey  the
scriptures  and  manufacture  their  own  way  of  austerities  and  penances.  One
should always remember the ultimate end of the demoniac people, as described
in  the  previous  chapter. The Lord forces them to take birth in the wombs of
demoniac  persons.  Consequently  they  will  live  by  demoniac  principles  life
after life without knowing their relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.  If,  however,  such  persons  are  fortunate  enough  to  be  guided  by  a
spiritual master who can direct them to the path of Vedic wisdom, they can get
out of this entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.

TEXT  7

AaharSTviPa SavRSYa i}aivDaae >aviTa iPa[Ya" )

YajSTaPaSTaQaa daNa& Taeza& >aediMaMa& é*<au )) 7 ))

ähäras tv api sarvasya
tri-vidho bhavati priyaù
yajïas tapas tathä dänaà
teñäà bhedam imaà çåëu

SYNONYMS

ähäraù—eating; tu—certainly; api—also; sarvasya—of everyone;
tri-vidhaù—of three kinds; bhavati—there is; priyaù—dear; yajïaù—sacrifice;
tapaù—austerity; tathä—also; dänam—charity; teñäm—of them; bhedam—the
differences; imam—this; çåëu—hear.

TRANSLATION

Even the food each person prefers is of three kinds, according to the three
modes of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices, austerities and charity.
Now hear of the distinctions between them.

PURPORT

In  terms  of  different  situations  in  the  modes  of  material  nature,  there  are
differences in the manner of eating and performing sacrifices, austerities and
charities.  They  are  not  all  conducted  on  the  same  level.  Those  who  can
understand  analytically  what  kind  of  performances  are  in  what  modes  of
material  nature  are  actually  wise;  those  who  consider  all  kinds  of  sacrifice  or
food or charity to be the same cannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There
are  missionary  workers  who  advocate  that  one  can  do  whatever  he  likes  and
attain  perfection.  But  these  foolish  guides  are  not  acting  according  to  the
direction  of  the  scripture.  They  are  manufacturing  ways  and  misleading  the

people in general.

TEXT  8

AaYau"Satvbl/araeGYaSau%Pa[qiTaivvDaRNaa" )

rSYaa" iòGDaa" iSQara ôÛa Aahara" Saaitvk-iPa[Yaa" )) 8 ))

äyuù-sattva-balärogya-
sukha-préti-vivardhanäù
rasyäù snigdhäù sthirä hådyä
ähäräù sättvika-priyäù

SYNONYMS

äyuù—duration of life; sattva—existence; bala—strength; ärogya—health;
sukha—happiness; préti—and satisfaction; vivardhanäù—increasing;
rasyäù—juicy; snigdhäù—fatty; sthiräù—enduring; hådyäù—pleasing to the
heart; ähäräù—food; sättvika—to one in goodness; priyäù—palatable.

TRANSLATION

Foods dear to those in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life,
purify one’s existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction.
Such foods are juicy, fatty, wholesome, and pleasing to the heart.

TEXT  9

k-Èãl/v<aaTYauZ<aTaq+<aæ+aivdaihNa" )

Aahara raJaSaSYaeía du"%Xaaek-aMaYaPa[da" )) 9 ))

kaöv-amla-lavaëäty-uñëa-
tékñëa-rükña-vidähinaù
ähärä räjasasyeñöä

duùkha-çokämaya-pradäù

SYNONYMS

kaöu—bitter; amla—sour; lavaëa—salty; ati-uñëa—very hot; tékñëa—pungent;
rükña—dry; vidähinaù—burning; ähäräù—food; räjasasya—to one in the mode
of passion; iñöäù—palatable; duùkha—distress; çoka—misery; ämaya—disease;
pradäù—causing.

TRANSLATION

Foods that are too bitter, too sour, salty, hot, pungent, dry and burning are

dear to those in the mode of passion. Such foods cause distress, misery and
disease.

TEXT  10

YaaTaYaaMa& GaTarSa& PaUiTa PaYauRizTa& c YaTa( )

oiC^íMaiPa caMaeDYa& >aaeJaNa& TaaMaSaiPa[YaMa( )) 10 ))

yäta-yämaà gata-rasaà
püti paryuñitaà ca yat
ucchiñöam api cämedhyaà
bhojanaà tämasa-priyam

SYNONYMS

yäta-yämam—food cooked three hours before being eaten;
gata-rasam—tasteless; püti—bad-smelling; paryuñitam—decomposed; ca—also;
yat—that which; ucchiñöam—remnants of food eaten by others; api—also;
ca—and; amedhyam—untouchable; bhojanam—eating; tämasa—to one in the
mode of darkness; priyam—dear.

TRANSLATION

Food prepared more than three hours before being eaten, food that is

tasteless, decomposed and putrid, and food consisting of remnants and
untouchable things is dear to those in the mode of darkness.

PURPORT

The purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the mind and
aid  bodily  strength.  This  is  its  only  purpose.  In  the  past,  great  authorities
selected  those  foods  that  best  aid  health  and  increase  life’s  duration,  such  as
milk  products,  sugar,  rice,  wheat,  fruits  and  vegetables.  These  foods  are  very
dear to those in the mode of goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn
and  molasses,  while  not  very  palatable  in  themselves,  can  be  made  pleasant
when mixed with milk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness.
All these foods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchable
things like meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighth verse, have
no connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animal fat is available in
the form of milk, which is the most wonderful of all foods. Milk, butter, cheese
and similar products give animal fat in a form which rules out any need for the
killing  of  innocent  creatures.  It  is  only  through  brute  mentality  that  this
killing  goes  on.  The  civilized  method  of  obtaining  needed  fat  is  by  milk.
Slaughter  is  the  way  of  subhumans.  Protein  is  amply  available  through  split
peas, däl, whole wheat, etc.

Foods  in  the  mode  of  passion,  which  are  bitter,  too  salty,  or  too  hot  or
overly  mixed  with  red  pepper,  cause  misery  by  reducing  the  mucus  in  the
stomach,  leading  to  disease.  Foods  in  the  mode  of  ignorance  or  darkness  are
essentially  those  that  are  not  fresh.  Any  food  cooked  more  than  three  hours
before it is eaten (except prasädam, food offered to the Lord) is considered to
be in the mode of darkness. Because they are decomposing, such foods give a
bad  odor,  which  often  attracts  people  in  this  mode  but  repulses  those  in  the
mode of goodness.

Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal that was
first  offered  to  the  Supreme  Lord  or  first  eaten  by  saintly  persons,  especially
the  spiritual  master.  Otherwise  the  remnants  of  food  are  considered  to  be  in

the mode of darkness, and they increase infection or disease. Such foodstuffs,
although very palatable to persons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked
nor  even  touched  by  those  in  the  mode  of  goodness.  The  best  food  is  the
remnants  of  what  is  offered  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  In
Bhagavad-gétä  the  Supreme  Lord  says  that  He  accepts  preparations  of
vegetables, flour and milk when offered with devotion. Patraà puñpaà phalaà
toyam.  Of  course,  devotion  and  love  are  the  chief  things  which  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  accepts.  But  it  is  also  mentioned  that  the  prasädam
should be prepared in a particular way. Any food prepared by the injunctions
of  the  scripture  and  offered  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  can  be
taken  even  if  prepared  long,  long  ago,  because  such  food  is  transcendental.
Therefore  to  make  food  antiseptic,  eatable  and  palatable  for  all  persons,  one
should offer food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  11

Af-l/ak-ax(i+ai>aYaRjae iviDad*íae Ya wJYaTae )

YaíVYaMaeveiTa MaNa" SaMaaDaaYa Sa Saaitvk-" )) 11 ))

aphaläkäìkñibhir yajïo
vidhi-diñöo ya ijyate
yañöavyam eveti manaù
samädhäya sa sättvikaù

SYNONYMS

aphala-äkäìkñibhiù—by those devoid of desire for result; yajïaù—sacrifice;
vidhi-diñöaù—according to the direction of scripture; yaù—which; ijyate—is
performed; yañöavyam—must be performed; eva—certainly; iti—thus;
manaù—mind; samädhäya—fixing; saù—it; sättvikaù—in the mode of
goodness.

TRANSLATION

Of sacrifices, the sacrifice performed according to the directions of scripture,
as a matter of duty, by those who desire no reward, is of the nature of goodness.

PURPORT

The  general  tendency  is  to  offer  sacrifice  with  some  purpose  in  mind,  but
here it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without any such desire. It
should  be  done  as  a  matter  of  duty.  Take,  for  example,  the  performance  of
rituals  in  temples  or  in  churches.  Generally  they  are  performed  with  the
purpose  of  material  benefit,  but  that  is  not  in  the  mode  of  goodness.  One
should  go  to  a  temple  or  church  as  a  matter  of  duty,  offer  respect  to  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  offer  flowers  and  eatables.  Everyone
thinks  that  there  is  no  use  in  going  to  the  temple  just  to  worship  God.  But
worship  for  economic  benefit  is  not  recommended  in  the  scriptural
injunctions. One should go simply to offer respect to the Deity. That will place
one in the mode of goodness. It is the duty of every civilized man to obey the
injunctions  of  the  scriptures  and  offer  respect  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead.

TEXT

 12

Ai>aSaNDaaYa Tau f-l&/ dM>aaQaRMaiPa cEv YaTa( )

wJYaTae >arTaé[eï Ta& Yaj& iviÖ raJaSaMa( )) 12 ))

abhisandhäya tu phalaà
dambhärtham api caiva yat
ijyate bharata-çreñöha
taà yajïaà viddhi räjasam

SYNONYMS

abhisandhäya—desiring; tu—but; phalam—the result; dambha—pride;
artham—for the sake of; api—also; ca—and; eva—certainly; yat—that which;

ijyate—is performed; bharata-çreñöha—O chief of the Bhäratas; tam—that;
yajïam—sacrifice; viddhi—know; räjasam—in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

But the sacrifice performed for some material benefit, or for the sake of
pride, O chief of the Bhäratas, you should know to be in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

Sometimes  sacrifices  and  rituals  are  performed  for  elevation  to  the
heavenly kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Such sacrifices
or ritualistic performances are considered to be in the mode of passion.

TEXT

 13

iviDahqNaMaSa*íaà& MaN}ahqNaMadi+a<aMa( )

é[ÖaivrihTa& Yaj& TaaMaSa& Pairc+aTae )) 13 ))

vidhi-hénam asåñöännaà
mantra-hénam adakñiëam
çraddhä-virahitaà yajïaà
tämasaà paricakñate

SYNONYMS

vidhi-hénam—without scriptural direction; asåñöa-annam—without
distribution of prasädam; mantra-hénam—with no chanting of the Vedic
hymns; adakñiëam—with no remunerations to the priests; çraddhä—faith;
virahitam—without; yajïam—sacrifice; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance;
paricakñate—is to be considered.

TRANSLATION

Any sacrifice performed without regard for the directions of scripture,

without distribution of prasädam [spiritual food], without chanting of Vedic
hymns and remunerations to the priests, and without faith is considered to be in
the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

Faith  in  the  mode  of  darkness  or  ignorance  is  actually  faithlessness.
Sometimes people worship some demigod just to make money and then spend
the money for recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Such ceremonial
shows  of  religiosity  are  not  accepted  as  genuine.  They  are  all  in  the  mode  of
darkness;  they  produce  a  demoniac  mentality  and  do  not  benefit  human
society.

TEXT  14

deviÜJaGauåPa[ajPaUJaNa& XaaEcMaaJaRvMa( )

b]øcYaRMaih&Saa c Xaarqr& TaPa oCYaTae )) 14 ))

deva-dvija-guru-präjïa-
püjanaà çaucam ärjavam
brahmacaryam ahiàsä ca
çäréraà tapa ucyate

SYNONYMS

deva—of the Supreme Lord; dvija—the brähmaëas; guru—the spiritual master;
präjïa—and worshipable personalities; püjanam—worship;
çaucam—cleanliness; ärjavam—simplicity; brahmacaryam—celibacy;
ahiàsä—nonviolence; ca—also; çäréram—pertaining to the body;
tapaù—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

Austerity of the body consists in worship of the Supreme Lord, the

brähmaëas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the father and mother, and
in cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence.

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Godhead  here  explains  the  different  kinds  of  austerity  and
penance. First He explains the austerities and penances practiced by the body.
One  should  offer,  or  learn  to  offer,  respect  to  God  or  to  the  demigods,  the
perfect, qualified brähmaëas and the spiritual master and superiors like father,
mother or any person who is conversant with Vedic knowledge. These should
be given proper respect. One should practice cleansing oneself externally and
internally, and he should learn to become simple in behavior. He should not do
anything which is not sanctioned by the scriptural injunctions. He should not
indulge in sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scripture only
in  marriage,  not  otherwise.  This  is  called  celibacy.  These  are  penances  and
austerities as far as the body is concerned.

TEXT  15

ANauÜeGak-r& vaKYa& SaTYa& iPa[YaihTa& c YaTa( )

SvaDYaaYaa>YaSaNa& cEv vax(MaYa& TaPa oCYaTae )) 15 ))

anudvega-karaà väkyaà
satyaà priya-hitaà ca yat
svädhyäyäbhyasanaà caiva
väì-mayaà tapa ucyate

SYNONYMS

anudvega-karam—not agitating; väkyam—words; satyam—truthful;
priya—dear; hitam—beneficial; ca—also; yat—which; svädhyäya—of Vedic
study; abhyasanam—practice; ca—also; eva—certainly; väk-mayam—of the
voice; tapaù—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

Austerity of speech consists in speaking words that are truthful, pleasing,

beneficial, and not agitating to others, and also in regularly reciting Vedic
literature.

PURPORT

One  should  not  speak  in  such  a  way  as  to  agitate  the  minds  of  others.  Of
course, when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the instruction of his
students, but such a teacher should not speak to those who are not his students
if  he  will  agitate  their  minds.  This  is  penance  as  far  as  talking  is  concerned.
Besides that, one should not talk nonsense. The process of speaking in spiritual
circles is to say something upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote
from scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time, such
talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions, one may derive
the  highest  benefit  and  elevate  human  society.  There  is  a  limitless  stock  of
Vedic literature, and one should study this. This is called penance of speech.

TEXT  16

MaNa"Pa[Saad" SaaEMYaTv& MaaENaMaaTMaiviNaGa]h" )

>aavSa&éuiÖirTYaeTataPaae MaaNaSaMauCYaTae )) 16 ))

manaù-prasädaù saumyatvaà
maunam ätma-vinigrahaù
bhäva-saàçuddhir ity etat
tapo mänasam ucyate

SYNONYMS

manaù-prasädaù—satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam—being without
duplicity towards others; maunam—gravity; ätma—of the self;

vinigrahaù—control; bhäva—of one’s nature; saàçuddhiù—purification;
iti—thus; etat—this; tapaù—austerity; mänasam—of the mind; ucyate—is said
to be.

TRANSLATION

And satisfaction, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purification of one’s

existence are the austerities of the mind.

PURPORT

To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It should
be so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good for others. The best
training for the mind is gravity in thought. One should not deviate from Kåñëa
consciousness and must always avoid sense gratification. To purify one’s nature
is to become Kåñëa conscious. Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by
taking the mind away from thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think
of sense enjoyment, the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age
we  unnecessarily  engage  the  mind  in  so  many  different  ways  for  sense
gratification,  and  so  there  is  no  possibility  of  the  mind’s  becoming  satisfied.
The best course is to divert the mind to the Vedic literature, which is full of
satisfying  stories,  as  in  the  Puräëas  and  the  Mahäbhärata.  One  can  take
advantage  of  this  knowledge  and  thus  become  purified.  The  mind  should  be
devoid of duplicity, and one should think of the welfare of all. Silence means
that  one  is  always  thinking  of  self-realization.  The  person  in  Kåñëa
consciousness  observes  perfect  silence  in  this  sense.  Control  of  the  mind
means  detaching  the  mind  from  sense  enjoyment.  One  should  be
straightforward  in  his  dealings  and  thereby  purify  his  existence.  All  these
qualities together constitute austerity in mental activities.

TEXT  17

é[ÖYaa ParYaa Taá& TaPaSTaiT}aivDa& NarE" )

Af-l/ak-ax(i+ai>aYauR¢E-" Saaitvk&- Pairc+aTae )) 17 ))

çraddhayä parayä taptaà
tapas tat tri-vidhaà naraiù
aphaläkäìkñibhir yuktaiù
sättvikaà paricakñate

SYNONYMS

çraddhayä—with faith; parayä—transcendental; taptam—executed;
tapaù—austerity; tat—that; tri-vidham—of three kinds; naraiù—by men;
aphala-äkäìkñibhiù—who are without desires for fruits; yuktaiù—engaged;
sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; paricakñate—is called.

TRANSLATION

This threefold austerity, performed with transcendental faith by men not
expecting material benefits but engaged only for the sake of the Supreme, is
called austerity in goodness.

TEXT  18

SaTk-arMaaNaPaUJaaQa| TaPaae dM>aeNa cEv YaTa( )

i§-YaTae Taidh Pa[ae¢&- raJaSa& cl/MaDa]uvMa( )) 18 ))

satkära-mäna-püjärthaà
tapo dambhena caiva yat
kriyate tad iha proktaà
räjasaà calam adhruvam

SYNONYMS

sat-kära—respect; mäna—honor; püjä—and worship; artham—for the sake of;
tapaù—austerity; dambhena—with pride; ca—also; eva—certainly;

yat—which; kriyate—is performed; tat—that; iha—in this world; proktam—is
said; räjasam—in the mode of passion; calam—flickering;
adhruvam—temporary.

TRANSLATION

Penance performed out of pride and for the sake of gaining respect, honor

and worship is said to be in the mode of passion. It is neither stable nor
permanent.

PURPORT

Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and receive
honor,  respect  and  worship  from  others.  Persons  in  the  mode  of  passion
arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their feet and offer
riches.  Such  arrangements  artificially  made  by  the  performance  of  penances
are  considered  to  be  in  the  mode  of  passion.  The  results  are  temporary;  they
can be continued for some time, but they are not permanent.

TEXT  19

MaU!Ga]ahe<aaTMaNaae YaTPaq@Yaa i§-YaTae TaPa" )

ParSYaaeTSaadNaaQa| va TataaMaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 19 ))

müòha-gräheëätmano yat
péòayä kriyate tapaù
parasyotsädanärthaà vä
tat tämasam udähåtam

SYNONYMS

müòha—foolish; gräheëa—with endeavor; ätmanaù—of one’s own self;
yat—which; péòayä—by torture; kriyate—is performed; tapaù—penance;
parasya—to others; utsädana-artham—for the sake of causing annihilation;

vä—or; tat—that; tämasam—in the mode of darkness; udähåtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

Penance performed out of foolishness, with self-torture or to destroy or

injure others, is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

There  are  instances  of  foolish  penance  undertaken  by  demons  like
Hiraëyakaçipu, who performed austere penances to become immortal and kill
the  demigods.  He  prayed  to  Brahmä  for  such  things,  but  ultimately  he  was
killed  by  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  To  undergo  penances  for
something which is impossible is certainly in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT

 20

daTaVYaiMaiTa YaÕaNa& dqYaTae_NauPak-air<ae )

deXae k-ale/ c Paa}ae c TaÕaNa& Saaitvk&- SMa*TaMa( )) 20 ))

dätavyam iti yad dänaà
déyate ’nupakäriëe
deçe käle ca pätre ca
tad dänaà sättvikaà småtam

SYNONYMS

dätavyam—worth giving; iti—thus; yat—that which; dänam—charity;
déyate—is given; anupakäriëe—irrespective of return; deçe—in a proper place;
käle—at a proper time; ca—also; pätre—to a suitable person; ca—and;
tat—that; dänam—charity; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; småtam—is
considered.

TRANSLATION

Charity given out of duty, without expectation of return, at the proper time
and place, and to a worthy person is considered to be in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

In  the  Vedic  literature,  charity  given  to  a  person  engaged  in  spiritual
activities  is  recommended.  There  is  no  recommendation  for  giving  charity
indiscriminately.  Spiritual  perfection  is  always  a  consideration.  Therefore
charity  is  recommended  to  be  given  at  a  place  of  pilgrimage  and  at  lunar  or
solar  eclipses  or  at  the  end  of  the  month  or  to  a  qualified  brähmaëa  or  a
Vaiñëava (devotee) or in temples. Such charities should be given without any
consideration  of  return.  Charity  to  the  poor  is  sometimes  given  out  of
compassion, but if a poor man is not worth giving charity to, then there is no
is  not
spiritual  advancement.  In  other  words, 
recommended in the Vedic literature.

indiscriminate  charity 

TEXT  21

Yatau Pa[TYauPak-araQa| f-l/MauiÕXYa va PauNa" )

dqYaTae c Pairi©-í& TaÕaNa& raJaSa& SMa*TaMa( )) 21 ))

yat tu pratyupakärärthaà
phalam uddiçya vä punaù
déyate ca parikliñöaà
tad dänaà räjasaà småtam

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; tu—but; prati-upakära-artham—for the sake of getting some
return; phalam—a result; uddiçya—desiring; vä—or; punaù—again; déyate—is
given; ca—also; parikliñöam—grudgingly; tat—that; dänam—charity;
räjasam—in the mode of passion; småtam—is understood to be.

TRANSLATION

But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a desire

for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to be charity in the mode of
passion.

PURPORT

Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom and
sometimes  with  great  trouble  and  with  repentance  afterwards:  “Why  have  I
spent  so  much  in  this  way?”  Charity  is  also  sometimes  given  under  some
obligation,  at  the  request  of  a  superior.  These  kinds  of  charity  are  said  to  be
given in the mode of passion.

There  are  many  charitable  foundations  which  offer  their  gifts  to
institutions  where  sense  gratification  goes  on.  Such  charities  are  not
recommended in the Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode of goodness is
recommended.

TEXT  22

AdeXak-ale/ YaÕaNaMaPaa}ae>Yaê dqYaTae )

ASaTk*-TaMavjaTa& TataaMaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 22 ))

adeça-käle yad dänam
apätrebhyaç ca déyate
asat-kåtam avajïätaà
tat tämasam udähåtam

SYNONYMS

adeça—at an unpurified place; käle—and unpurified time; yat—that which;
dänam—charity; upätrebhyaù—to unworthy persons; ca—also; déyate—is
given; asat-kåtam—without respect; avajïätam—without proper attention;

tat—that; tämasam—in the mode of darkness; udähåtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And charity performed at an impure place, at an improper time, to unworthy

persons, or without proper attention and respect is said to be in the mode of
ignorance.

PURPORT

Contributions  for  indulgence  in  intoxication  and  gambling  are  not
encouraged here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance. Such
charity  is  not  beneficial;  rather,  sinful  persons  are  encouraged.  Similarly,  if  a
person  gives  charity  to  a  suitable  person  but  without  respect  and  without
attention, that sort of charity is also said to be in the mode of darkness.

TEXT  23

p TaTSaidiTa iNadeRXaae b]ø<aiñivDa" SMa*Ta" )

b]aø<aaSTaeNa vedaê Yajaê ivihTaa" Paura )) 23 ))

oà tat sad iti nirdeço
brahmaëas tri-vidhaù småtaù
brähmaëäs tena vedäç ca
yajïäç ca vihitäù purä

SYNONYMS

oà—indication of the Supreme; tat—that; sat—eternal; iti—thus;
nirdeçaù—indication; brahmaëaù—of the Supreme; tri-vidhaù—threefold;
småtaù—is considered; brähmaëäù—the brähmaëas; tena—with that;
vedäù—the Vedic literature; ca—also; yajïäù—sacrifice; ca—also;
vihitäù—used; purä—formerly.

TRANSLATION

From the beginning of creation, the three words oà tat sat were used to
indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth. These three symbolic representations
were used by brähmaëas while chanting the hymns of the Vedas and during
sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Supreme.

PURPORT

It has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are divided
into  three  categories:  the  modes  of  goodness,  passion  and  ignorance.  But
whether  first  class,  second  class  or  third  class,  they  are  all  conditioned,
contaminated  by  the  material  modes  of  nature.  When  they  are  aimed  at  the
Supreme—oà tat sat, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternal—they
become  means  for  spiritual  elevation.  In  the  scriptural  injunctions  such  an
objective is indicated. These three words, oà tat sat, particularly indicate the
Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the
word oà is always found.

One  who  acts  without  following  the  regulations  of  the  scriptures  will  not
attain  the  Absolute  Truth.  He  will  get  some  temporary  result,  but  not  the
ultimate  end  of  life.  The  conclusion  is  that  the  performance  of  charity,
sacrifice and penance must be done in the mode of goodness. Performed in the
mode of passion or ignorance, they are certainly inferior in quality. The three
words oà tat sat are uttered in conjunction with the holy name of the Supreme
Lord,  e.g.,  oà  tad  viñëoù.  Whenever  a  Vedic  hymn  or  the  holy  name  of  the
Supreme  Lord  is  uttered,  oà  is  added.  This  is  the  indication  of  Vedic
literature.  These  three  words  are  taken  from  Vedic  hymns.  Oà  ity  etad
brahmaëo nediñöhaà näma (Åg Veda) indicates the first goal. Then tat tvam asi
(Chändogya Upaniñad  6.8.7)  indicates  the  second  goal.  And  sad  eva  saumya
(Chändogya Upaniñad  6.2.1)  indicates  the  third  goal.  Combined  they  become
oà  tat  sat.  Formerly  when  Brahmä,  the  first  created  living  entity,  performed
sacrifices,  he  indicated  by  these  three  words  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead.  Therefore  the  same  principle  has  always  been  followed  by  disciplic

succession.  So  this  hymn  has  great  significance.  Bhagavad-gétä  recommends,
therefore,  that  any  work  done  should  be  done  for  oà  tat  sat,  or  for  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  When  one  performs  penance,  charity  and
sacrifice  with  these  three  words,  he  is  acting  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  a  scientific  execution  of  transcendental  activities  which
enables  one  to  return  home,  back  to  Godhead.  There  is  no  loss  of  energy  in
acting in such a transcendental way.

TEXT  24

TaSMaad( p wTYaudaôTYa YajdaNaTaPa"i§-Yaa" )

Pa[vTaRNTae ivDaaNaae¢-a" SaTaTa& b]øvaidNaaMa( )) 24 ))

tasmäd oà ity udähåtya
yajïa-däna-tapaù-kriyäù
pravartante vidhänoktäù
satataà brahma-vädinäm

SYNONYMS

tasmät—therefore; oà—beginning with oà; iti—thus; udähåtya—indicating;
yajïa—of sacrifice; däna—charity; tapaù—and penance;
kriyäù—performances; pravartante—begin; vidhäna-uktäù—according to
scriptural regulation; satatam—always; brahma-vädinäm—of the
transcendentalists.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, transcendentalists undertaking performances of sacrifice, charity
and penance in accordance with scriptural regulations begin always with oà, to
attain the Supreme.

PURPORT

Oà tad viñëoù paramaà padam (Åg Veda 1.22.20). The lotus feet of Viñëu
are the supreme devotional platform. The performance of everything on behalf
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead assures the perfection of all activity.

TEXT  25

TaidTYaNai>aSaNDaaYa f-l&/ YajTaPa"i§-Yaa" )

daNai§-Yaaê ivivDaa" i§-YaNTae Maae+ak-ax(i+ai>a" )) 25 ))

tad ity anabhisandhäya
phalaà yajïa-tapaù-kriyäù
däna-kriyäç ca vividhäù
kriyante mokña-käìkñibhiù

SYNONYMS

tat—that; iti—thus; anabhisandhäya—without desiring; phalam—the fruitive
result; yajïa—of sacrifice; tapaù—and penance; kriyäù—activities; däna—of
charity; kriyäù—activities; ca—also; vividhäù—various; kriyante—are done;
mokña-käìkñibhiù—by those who actually desire liberation.

TRANSLATION

Without desiring fruitive results, one should perform various kinds of

sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The purpose of such
transcendental activities is to get free from material entanglement.

PURPORT

To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any material
gain.  Acts  should  be  performed  for  the  ultimate  gain  of  being  transferred  to
the spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.

TEXTS

 26–27

SaÙave SaaDau>aave c SaidTYaeTaTPa[YauJYaTae )

Pa[XaSTae k-MaRi<a TaQaa SaC^Bd" PaaQaR YauJYaTae )) 26 ))

Yaje TaPaiSa daNae c iSQaiTa" SaidiTa caeCYaTae )

k-MaR cEv TadQasYa& SaidTYaevai>aDaqYaTae )) 27 ))

sad-bhäve sädhu-bhäve ca
sad ity etat prayujyate
praçaste karmaëi tathä
sac-chabdaù pärtha yujyate

yajïe tapasi däne ca
sthitiù sad iti cocyate
karma caiva tad-arthéyaà
sad ity eväbhidhéyate

SYNONYMS

sat-bhäve—in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sädhu-bhäve—in the
sense of the nature of the devotee; ca—also; sat—the word sat; iti—thus;
etat—this; prayujyate—is used; praçaste—in bona fide; karmaëi—activities;
tathä—also; sat-çabdaù—the sound sat; pärtha—O son of Påthä; yujyate—is
used; yajïe—in sacrifice; tapasi—in penance; däne—in charity; ca—also;
sthitiù—the situation; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; ca—and; ucyate—is
pronounced; karma—work; ca—also; eva—certainly; tat—for that;
arthéyam—meant; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; eva—certainly; abhidhéyate—is
indicated.

TRANSLATION

The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is

indicated by the word sat. The performer of such sacrifice is also called sat, as
are all works of sacrifice, penance and charity which, true to the absolute

nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, O son of Påthä.

PURPORT

The words praçaste karmaëi, or “prescribed duties,” indicate that there are
many  activities  prescribed  in  the  Vedic  literature  which  are  purificatory
processes,  beginning  from  the  time  of  conception  up  to  the  end  of  one’s  life.
Such  purificatory  processes  are  adopted  for  the  ultimate  liberation  of  the
living  entity.  In  all  such  activities it is recommended that one vibrate oà tat
sat.  The  words  sad-bhäve  and  sädhu-bhäve  indicate  the  transcendental
situation. Acting in Kåñëa consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully
conscious  of  the  activities  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  called  a  sädhu.  In  the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  (3.25.25)  it  is  said  that  the  transcendental  subject  matter
becomes  clear  in  the  association  of  the  devotees.  The  words  used  are  satäà
prasaìgät.  Without  good  association,  one  cannot  achieve  transcendental
knowledge.  When  initiating  a  person  or  offering  the  sacred  thread,  one
vibrates  the  words  oà  tat  sat.  Similarly,  in  all  kinds  of  performance  of  yajïa
the  object  is  the  Supreme,  oà  tat  sat.  The  word  tad-arthéyam  further  means
offering  service  to  anything  which  represents  the  Supreme,  including  such
service as cooking and helping in the Lord’s temple, or any other kind of work
for  broadcasting  the  glories  of  the  Lord.  These  supreme  words  oà  tat  sat  are
thus used in many ways to perfect all activities and make everything complete.

TEXT  28

Aé[ÖYaa huTa& dta& TaPaSTaá& k*-Ta& c YaTa( )

ASaidTYauCYaTae PaaQaR Na c TaTPa[eTYa Naae wh )) 28 ))

açraddhayä hutaà dattaà
tapas taptaà kåtaà ca yat
asad ity ucyate pärtha
na ca tat pretya no iha

SYNONYMS

açraddhayä—without faith; hutam—offered in sacrifice; dattam—given;
tapaù—penance; taptam—executed; kåtam—performed; ca—also; yat—that
which; asat—false; iti—thus; ucyate—is said to be; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
na—never; ca—also; tat—that; pretya—after death; na u—nor; iha—in this
life.

TRANSLATION

Anything done as sacrifice, charity or penance without faith in the Supreme,

O son of Påthä, is impermanent. It is called asat and is useless both in this life
and the next.

PURPORT

Anything  done  without  the  transcendental  objective—whether  it  be
sacrifice, charity or penance—is useless. Therefore in this verse it is declared
that  such  activities  are  abominable.  Everything  should  be  done  for  the
Supreme in Kåñëa consciousness. Without such faith, and without the proper
guidance, there can never be any fruit. In all the Vedic scriptures, faith in the
Supreme is advised. In the pursuit of all Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is
the understanding of Kåñëa. No one can obtain success without following this
principle.  Therefore,  the  best  course  is  to  work  from  the  very  beginning  in
Kåñëa consciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. That is
the way to make everything successful.

In  the  conditional  state,  people  are  attracted  to  worshiping  demigods,
ghosts, or Yakñas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than the modes
of passion and ignorance, but one who takes directly to Kåñëa consciousness is
transcendental  to  all  three  modes  of  material  nature.  Although  there  is  a
process of gradual elevation, if one, by the association of pure devotees, takes
directly to Kåñëa consciousness, that is the best way. And that is recommended
in this chapter. To achieve success in this way, one must first find the proper

spiritual  master  and  receive  training  under  his  direction.  Then  one  can
achieve faith in the Supreme. When that faith matures, in course of time, it is
called  love  of  God.  This  love  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  the  living  entities.  One
should  therefore  take  to  Kåñëa  consciousness  directly.  That  is  the  message  of
this Seventeenth Chapter.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventeenth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of the Divisions of Faith.

- CHAPTER 18 -
Conclusion—The Perfection of Renunciation

TEXT  1

AJauRNa ovac )

SaNNYaaSaSYa Mahabahae TatviMaC^aiMa veidTauMa( )

TYaaGaSYa c ôzqke-Xa Pa*Qa¡e-iXaiNazUdNa )) 1 ))

arjuna uväca
sannyäsasya mahä-bäho
tattvam icchämi veditum
tyägasya ca håñékeça
påthak keçé-niñüdana

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; sannyäsasya—of renunciation; mahä-bäho—O
mighty-armed one; tattvam—the truth; icchämi—I wish; veditum—to

understand; tyägasya—of renunciation; ca—also; håñékeça—O master of the
senses; påthak—differently; keçé-niñüdana—O killer of the Keçé demon.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of
renunciation [tyäga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyäsa], O killer of
the Keçé demon, master of the senses.

PURPORT

Actually  the  Bhagavad-gétä  is  finished  in  seventeen  chapters.  The
Eighteenth Chapter is a supplementary summarization of the topics discussed
before. In every chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, Lord Kåñëa stresses that devotional
service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal of life.
This  same  point  is  summarized  in  the  Eighteenth  Chapter  as  the  most
confidential  path  of  knowledge.  In  the  first  six  chapters,  stress  was  given  to
devotional service: yoginäm api sarveñäà. .. “Of all yogés or transcendentalists,
one who always thinks of Me within himself is best.” In the next six chapters,
pure devotional service and its nature and activity were discussed. In the third
six  chapters,  knowledge,  renunciation,  the  activities  of  material  nature  and
transcendental  nature,  and  devotional  service  were  described.  It  was
concluded that all acts should be performed in conjunction with the Supreme
Lord, represented by the words oà tat sat, which indicate Viñëu, the Supreme
Person. The third part of Bhagavad-gétä has shown that devotional service, and
nothing else, is the ultimate purpose of life. This has been established by citing
past  äcäryas  and  the  Brahma-sütra,  the  Vedänta-sütra.  Certain  impersonalists
consider  themselves  to  have  a  monopoly  on  the  knowledge  of  Vedänta-sütra,
but actually the Vedänta-sütra is meant for understanding devotional service,
for  the  Lord  Himself  is  the  composer  of  the  Vedänta-sütra  and  He  is  its
knower. That is described in the Fifteenth Chapter. In every scripture, every
Veda, devotional service is the objective. That is explained in Bhagavad-gétä.

As  in  the  Second  Chapter  a  synopsis  of  the  whole  subject  matter  was
described,  in  the  Eighteenth  Chapter  also  the  summary  of  all  instruction  is

given.  The  purpose  of  life  is  indicated  to  be  renunciation  and  attainment  of
the transcendental position above the three material modes of nature. Arjuna
wants  to  clarify  the  two  distinct  subject  matters  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  namely
renunciation  (tyäga)  and  the  renounced  order  of  life  (sannyäsa).  Thus  he  is
asking the meaning of these two words.

Two  words  used  in  this  verse  to  address  the  Supreme  Lord—Håñékeça  and
Keçé-niñüdana—are significant. Håñékeça is Kåñëa, the master of all senses, who
can always help us attain mental serenity. Arjuna requests Him to summarize
everything  in  such  a  way  that  he  can  remain  equipoised.  Yet  he  has  some
doubts,  and  doubts  are  always  compared  to  demons.  He  therefore  addresses
Kåñëa as Keçé-niñüdana. Keçé was a most formidable demon who was killed by
the Lord; now Arjuna is expecting Kåñëa to kill the demon of doubt.

TEXT  2

é[q>aGavaNauvac )

k-aMYaaNaa& k-MaR<aa& NYaaSa& SaNNYaaSa& k-vYaae ivdu" )

SavRk-MaRf-l/TYaaGa& Pa[ahuSTYaaGa& ivc+a<aa" )) 2 ))

çré-bhagavän uväca
kämyänäà karmaëäà nyäsaà
sannyäsaà kavayo viduù
sarva-karma-phala-tyägaà
prähus tyägaà vicakñaëäù

SYNONYMS

çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
kämyänäm—with desire; karmaëäm—of activities; nyäsam—renunciation;
sannyäsam—the renounced order of life; kavayaù—the learned; viduù—know;
sarva—of all; karma—activities; phala—of results; tyägam—renunciation;
prähuù—call; tyägam—renunciation; vicakñaëäù—the experienced.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The giving up of activities that
are based on material desire is what great learned men call the renounced order
of life [sannyäsa]. And giving up the results of all activities is what the wise call
renunciation [tyäga].

PURPORT

The  performance  of  activities  for  results  has  to  be  given  up.  This  is  the
instruction  of  Bhagavad-gétä.  But  activities  leading  to  advanced  spiritual
knowledge are not to be given up. This will be made clear in the next verses. In
the  Vedic  literature  there  are  many  prescriptions  of  methods  for  performing
sacrifice for some particular purpose. There are certain sacrifices to perform to
attain  a  good  son  or  to  attain  elevation  to  the  higher  planets,  but  sacrifices
prompted by desires should be stopped. However, sacrifice for the purification
of one’s heart or for advancement in the spiritual science should not be given
up.

TEXT  3

TYaaJYa& daezvidTYaeke- k-MaR Pa[ahuMaRNaqiz<a" )

YajdaNaTaPa"k-MaR Na TYaaJYaiMaiTa caPare )) 3 ))

tyäjyaà doña-vad ity eke
karma prähur manéñiëaù
yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma
na tyäjyam iti cäpare

SYNONYMS

tyäjyam—must be given up; doña-vat—as an evil; iti—thus; eke—one group;
karma—work; prähuù—they say; manéñiëaù—great thinkers; yajïa—of

sacrifice; däna—charity; tapaù—and penance; karma—works; na—never;
tyäjyam—are to be given up; iti—thus; ca—and; apare—others.

TRANSLATION

Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should be given
up as faulty, yet other sages maintain that acts of sacrifice, charity and penance
should never be abandoned.

PURPORT

There  are  many  activities  in  the  Vedic  literature  which  are  subjects  of
contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed in a sacrifice,
yet  some  maintain  that  animal  killing  is  completely  abominable.  Although
animal killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedic literature, the animal
is not considered to be killed. The sacrifice is to give a new life to the animal.
Sometimes  the  animal  is  given  a  new  animal  life  after  being  killed  in  the
sacrifice,  and  sometimes  the  animal  is  promoted  immediately  to  the  human
form of life. But there are different opinions among the sages. Some say that
animal  killing  should  always  be  avoided,  and  others  say  that  for  a  specific
sacrifice it is good. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are now
being clarified by the Lord Himself.

TEXT  4

iNaêYa& é*<au Mae Ta}a TYaaGae >arTaSataMa )

TYaaGaae ih PauåzVYaaga] i}aivDa" SaMPa[k-IiTaRTa" )) 4 ))

niçcayaà çåëu me tatra
tyäge bharata-sattama
tyägo hi puruña-vyäghra
tri-vidhaù samprakértitaù

SYNONYMS

niçcayam—certainty; çåëu—hear; me—from Me; tatra—therein; tyäge—in the
matter of renunciation; bharata-sat-tama—O best of the Bhäratas;
tyägaù—renunciation; hi—certainly; puruña-vyäghra—O tiger among human
beings; tri-vidhaù—of three kinds; samprakértitaù—is declared.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Bhäratas, now hear My judgment about renunciation. O tiger

among men, renunciation is declared in the scriptures to be of three kinds.

PURPORT

Although  there  are  differences  of  opinion  about  renunciation,  here  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, gives His judgment, which should
be  taken  as  final.  After  all,  the  Vedas  are  different  laws  given  by  the  Lord.
Here  the  Lord  is  personally  present,  and  His  word  should  be  taken  as  final.
The Lord says that the process of renunciation should be considered in terms
of the modes of material nature in which they are performed.

TEXT

 5

YajdaNaTaPa"k-MaR Na TYaaJYa& k-aYaRMaev TaTa( )

Yajae daNa& TaPaêEv PaavNaaiNa MaNaqiz<aaMa( )) 5 ))

yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma
na tyäjyaà käryam eva tat
yajïo dänaà tapaç caiva
pävanäni manéñiëäm

SYNONYMS

yajïa—of sacrifice; däna—charity; tapaù—and penance; karma—activity;

na—never; tyäjyam—to be given up; käryam—must be done; eva—certainly;
tat—that; yajïaù—sacrifice; dänam—charity; tapaù—penance; ca—also;
eva—certainly; pävanäni—purifying; manéñiëäm—even for the great souls.

TRANSLATION

Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up; they must be
performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great souls.

PURPORT

The yogés should perform acts for the advancement of human society. There
are many purificatory processes for advancing a human being to spiritual life.
The  marriage  ceremony,  for  example,  is  considered  to  be  one  of  these
sacrifices. It is called viväha-yajïa. Should a sannyäsé, who is in the renounced
order of life and who has given up his family relations, encourage the marriage
ceremony?  The  Lord  says  here  that  any  sacrifice  which  is  meant  for  human
welfare  should  never  be  given  up.  Viväha-yajïa,  the  marriage  ceremony,  is
meant to regulate the human mind so that it may become peaceful for spiritual
advancement. For most men, this viväha-yajïa should be encouraged even by
persons in the renounced order of life. Sannyäsés should never associate with
women,  but  that  does  not  mean  that  one  who  is in the lower stages of life, a
young man, should not accept a wife in the marriage ceremony. All prescribed
sacrifices are meant for achieving the Supreme Lord. Therefore, in the lower
stages, they should not be given up. Similarly, charity is for the purification of
the  heart.  If  charity  is  given  to  suitable  persons,  as  described  previously,  it
leads one to advanced spiritual life.

TEXT

 6

WTaaNYaiPa Tau k-MaaRi<a Sa®& TYa¤-a f-l/aiNa c )

k-TaRVYaaNaqiTa Mae PaaQaR iNaiêTa& MaTaMautaMaMa( )) 6 ))

etäny api tu karmäëi

saìgaà tyaktvä phaläni ca
kartavyänéti me pärtha
niçcitaà matam uttamam

SYNONYMS

etäni—all these; api—certainly; tu—but; karmäëi—activities;
saìgam—association; tyaktvä—renouncing; phaläni—results; ca—also;
kartavyäni—should be done as duty; iti—thus; me—My; pärtha—O son of
Påthä; niçcitam—definite; matam—opinion; uttamam—the best.

TRANSLATION

All these activities should be performed without attachment or any

expectation of result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of
Påthä. That is My final opinion.

PURPORT

Although  all  sacrifices  are  purifying,  one  should  not  expect  any  result  by
such performances. In other words, all sacrifices which are meant for material
advancement  in  life  should  be  given  up,  but  sacrifices  that  purify  one’s
existence  and  elevate  one  to  the  spiritual  plane  should  not  be  stopped.
Everything  that  leads  to  Kåñëa  consciousness  must  be  encouraged.  In  the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  also  it  is  said  that  any  activity  which  leads  to  devotional
service  to  the  Lord  should  be  accepted.  That  is  the  highest  criterion  of
religion.  A  devotee  of  the  Lord  should  accept  any  kind  of  work,  sacrifice  or
charity which will help him in the discharge of devotional service to the Lord.

TEXT  7

iNaYaTaSYa Tau SaNNYaaSa" k-MaR<aae NaaePaPaÛTae )

MaaehataSYa PairTYaaGaSTaaMaSa" Pairk-IiTaRTa" )) 7 ))

niyatasya tu sannyäsaù
karmaëo nopapadyate
mohät tasya parityägas
tämasaù parikértitaù

SYNONYMS

niyatasya—prescribed; tu—but; sannyäsaù—renunciation; karmaëaù—of
activities; na—never; upapadyate—is deserved; mohät—by illusion; tasya—of
them; parityägaù—renunciation; tämasaù—in the mode of ignorance;
parikértitaù—is declared.

TRANSLATION

Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If one gives up his prescribed

duties because of illusion, such renunciation is said to be in the mode of
ignorance.

PURPORT

Work  for  material  satisfaction  must  be  given  up,  but  activities  which
promote  one  to  spiritual  activity,  like  cooking  for  the  Supreme  Lord  and
offering the food to the Lord and then accepting the food, are recommended.
It  is  said  that  a  person  in  the  renounced  order  of  life  should  not  cook  for
himself. Cooking for oneself is prohibited, but cooking for the Supreme Lord is
not prohibited. Similarly, a sannyäsé may perform a marriage ceremony to help
his disciple in the advancement of Kåñëa consciousness. If one renounces such
activities, it is to be understood that he is acting in the mode of darkness.

TEXT  8

du"%iMaTYaev YaTk-MaR k-aYa©e-Xa>aYaatYaJaeTa( )

Sa k*-Tva raJaSa& TYaaGa& NaEv TYaaGaf-l&/ l/>aeTa( )) 8 ))

duùkham ity eva yat karma
käya-kleça-bhayät tyajet
sa kåtvä räjasaà tyägaà
naiva tyäga-phalaà labhet

SYNONYMS

duùkham—unhappy; iti—thus; eva—certainly; yat—which; karma—work;
käya—for the body; kleça—trouble; bhayät—out of fear; tyajet—gives up;
saù—he; kåtvä—after doing; räjasam—in the mode of passion;
tyägam—renunciation; na—not; eva—certainly; tyäga—of renunciation;
phalam—the results; labhet—gains.

TRANSLATION

Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome or out of fear of
bodily discomfort is said to have renounced in the mode of passion. Such action
never leads to the elevation of renunciation.

PURPORT

One who is in Kåñëa consciousness should not give up earning money out of
fear that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working one can engage his
money  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  or  if  by  rising  early  in  the  morning  one  can
advance his transcendental Kåñëa consciousness, one should not desist out of
fear or because such activities are considered troublesome. Such renunciation
is in the mode of passion. The result of passionate work is always miserable. If a
person renounces work in that spirit, he never gets the result of renunciation.

TEXT

 9

k-aYaRiMaTYaev YaTk-MaR iNaYaTa& i§-YaTae_JauRNa )

Sa®& TYa¤-a f-l&/ cEv Sa TYaaGa" Saaitvk-ae MaTa" )) 9 ))

käryam ity eva yat karma
niyataà kriyate ’rjuna
saìgaà tyaktvä phalaà caiva
sa tyägaù sättviko mataù

SYNONYMS

käryam—it must be done; iti—thus; eva—indeed; yat—which; karma—work;
niyatam—prescribed; kriyate—is performed; arjuna—O Arjuna;
saìgam—association; tyaktvä—giving up; phalam—the result; ca—also;
eva—certainly; saù—that; tyägaù—renunciation; sättvikaù—in the mode of
goodness; mataù—in My opinion.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, when one performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to
be done, and renounces all material association and all attachment to the fruit,
his renunciation is said to be in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Prescribed  duties  must  be  performed  with  this  mentality.  One  should  act
without attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from the modes
of work. A man working in Kåñëa consciousness in a factory does not associate
himself with the work of the factory, nor with the workers of the factory. He
simply works for Kåñëa. And when he gives up the result for Kåñëa, he is acting
transcendentally.

TEXT  10

Na Üeíyku-Xal&/ k-MaR ku-Xale/ NaaNauzÂTae )

TYaaGaq SatvSaMaaivíae MaeDaavq i^àSa&XaYa" )) 10 ))

na dveñöy akuçalaà karma

kuçale nänuñajjate
tyägé sattva-samäviñöo
medhävé chinna-saàçayaù

SYNONYMS

na—never; dveñöi—hates; akuçalam—inauspicious; karma—work; kuçale—in
the auspicious; na—nor; anuñajjate—becomes attached; tyägé—the renouncer;
sattva—in goodness; samäviñöaù—absorbed; medhävé—intelligent;
chinna—having cut off; saàçayaù—all doubts.

TRANSLATION

The intelligent renouncer situated in the mode of goodness, neither hateful

of inauspicious work nor attached to auspicious work, has no doubts about
work.

PURPORT

A person in Kåñëa consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not hate
anyone or anything which troubles his body. He does work in the proper place
and  at  the  proper  time  without  fearing  the  troublesome  effects  of  his  duty.
Such  a  person  situated  in  transcendence  should  be  understood  to  be  most
intelligent and beyond all doubts in his activities.

TEXT  11

Na ih deh>a*Taa XaKYa& TYa¢u-& k-MaaR<YaXaezTa" )

YaSTau k-MaRf-l/TYaaGaq Sa TYaaGaqTYai>aDaqYaTae )) 11 ))

na hi deha-bhåtä çakyaà
tyaktuà karmäëy açeñataù
yas tu karma-phala-tyägé
sa tyägéty abhidhéyate

SYNONYMS

na—never; hi—certainly; deha-bhåtä—by the embodied; çakyam—is possible;
tyaktum—to be renounced; karmäëi—activities; açeñataù—altogether;
yaù—anyone who; tu—but; karma—of work; phala—of the result; tyägé—the
renouncer; saù—he; tyägé—the renouncer; iti—thus; abhidhéyate—is said.

TRANSLATION

It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all activities. But he

who renounces the fruits of action is called one who has truly renounced.

PURPORT

It  is  said  in  Bhagavad-gétä  that  one  can  never  give  up  work  at  any  time.
Therefore he who works for Kåñëa and does not enjoy the fruitive results, who
offers everything to Kåñëa, is actually a renouncer. There are many members
of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness who work very hard in
their office or in the factory or some other place, and whatever they earn they
give  to  the  Society.  Such  highly  elevated  souls  are  actually  sannyäsés  and  are
situated  in  the  renounced  order  of  life.  It  is  clearly  outlined  here  how  to
renounce the fruits of work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.

TEXT  12

AiNaíiMaí& iMaé[& c i}aivDa& k-MaR<a" f-l/Ma( )

>avTYaTYaaiGaNaa& Pa[eTYa Na Tau SaNNYaaiSaNaa& KvicTa( )) 12 ))

aniñöam iñöaà miçraà ca
tri-vidhaà karmaëaù phalam
bhavaty atyäginäà pretya
na tu sannyäsinäà kvacit

SYNONYMS

aniñöam—leading to hell; iñöam—leading to heaven; miçram—mixed; ca—and;
tri-vidham—of three kinds; karmaëaù—of work; phalam—the result;
bhavati—comes; atyäginäm—for those who are not renounced; pretya—after
death; na—not; tu—but; sannyäsinäm—for the renounced order; kvacit—at
any time.

TRANSLATION

For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action—desirable,
undesirable and mixed—accrue after death. But those who are in the renounced
order of life have no such result to suffer or enjoy.

PURPORT

A  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  acting  in  knowledge  of  his  relationship
with Kåñëa is always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy or suffer
the results of his acts after death.

TEXT  13

PaÄETaaiNa Mahabahae k-ar<aaiNa iNabaeDa Mae )

Saa&:Yae k*-TaaNTae Pa[ae¢-aiNa iSaÖYae SavRk-MaR<aaMa( )) 13 ))

païcaitäni mahä-bäho
käraëäni nibodha me
säìkhye kåtänte proktäni
siddhaye sarva-karmaëäm

SYNONYMS

païca—five; etäni—these; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one;
käraëäni—causes; nibodha—just understand; me—from Me; säìkhye—in the

Vedänta; kåta-ante—in the conclusion; proktäni—said; siddhaye—for the
perfection; sarva—of all; karmaëäm—activities.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed Arjuna, according to the Vedänta there are five causes for

the accomplishment of all action. Now learn of these from Me.

PURPORT

A question may be raised that since any activity performed must have some
reaction,  how  is  it  that  the  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  does  not  suffer  or
enjoy  the  reactions  of  work?  The  Lord  is  citing  Vedänta  philosophy  to  show
how this is possible. He says that there are five causes for all activities, and for
success in all activity one should consider these five causes. Säìkhya means the
stalk of knowledge, and Vedänta is the final stalk of knowledge accepted by all
leading  äcäryas.  Even  Çaìkara  accepts  Vedänta-sütra  as  such.  Therefore  such
authority should be consulted.

The  ultimate  control  is  invested  in  the  Supersoul.  As  it  is  stated  in  the
Bhagavad-gétä,  sarvasya  cähaà  hådi  sanniviñöaù.  He  is  engaging  everyone  in
certain  activities  by  reminding  him  of  his  past  actions.  And  Kåñëa  conscious
acts done under His direction from within yield no reaction, either in this life
or in the life after death.

TEXT  14

AiDaïaNa& TaQaa k-TaaR k-r<a& c Pa*QaiGvDaMa( )

ivivDaaê Pa*QaKceía dEv& cEva}a PaÄMaMa( )) 14 ))

adhiñöhänaà tathä kartä
karaëaà ca påthag-vidham
vividhäç ca påthak ceñöä
daivaà caivätra païcamam

SYNONYMS

adhiñöhänam—the place; tathä—also; kartä—the worker;
karaëam—instruments; ca—and; påthak-vidham—of different kinds;
vividhäù—various; ca—and; påthak—separate; ceñöäù—the endeavors;
daivam—the Supreme; ca—also; eva—certainly; atra—here; païcamam—the
fifth.

TRANSLATION

The place of action [the body], the performer, the various senses, the many
different kinds of endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul—these are the five
factors of action.

PURPORT

The word adhiñöhänam refers to the body. The soul within the body is acting
to  bring  about  the  results  of  activity  and  is  therefore  known  as  kartä,  “the
doer.”  That  the  soul  is  the  knower  and  the  doer  is  stated  in  the  çruti.  Eña  hi
drañöä  srañöä  (Praçna Upaniñad  4.9).  It  is  also  confirmed  in  the  Vedänta-sütra
by  the  verses  jïo ’ta eva  (2.3.18)  and  kartä çästrärthavattvät  (2.3.33).  The
instruments of action are the senses, and by the senses the soul acts in various
ways.  For  each  and  every  action  there  is  a  different  endeavor.  But  all  one’s
activities depend on the will of the Supersoul, who is seated within the heart
as a friend. The Supreme Lord is the supercause. Under these circumstances,
he who is acting in Kåñëa consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul
situated  within  the  heart  is  naturally  not  bound  by  any  activity.  Those  in
complete Kåñëa consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions.
Everything  is  dependent  on  the  supreme  will,  the  Supersoul,  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  15

Xarqrvax(MaNaaei>aYaRTk-MaR Pa[ar>aTae Nar" )

NYaaYYa& va ivParqTa& va PaÄETae TaSYa heTav" )) 15 ))

çaréra-väì-manobhir yat
karma prärabhate naraù
nyäyyaà vä viparétaà vä
païcaite tasya hetavaù

SYNONYMS

çaréra—by the body; väk—speech; manobhiù—and mind; yat—which;
karma—work; prärabhate—begins; naraù—a person; nyäyyam—right; vä—or;
viparétam—the opposite; vä—or; païca—five; ete—all these; tasya—its;
hetavaù—causes.

TRANSLATION

Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech is

caused by these five factors.

PURPORT

The words “right” and “wrong” are very significant in this verse. Right work
is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in the scriptures, and wrong
work  is  work  done  against  the  principles  of  the  scriptural  injunctions.  But
whatever is done requires these five factors for its complete performance.

TEXT

 16

Ta}aEv& SaiTa k-TaaRrMaaTMaaNa& ke-vl&/ Tau Ya" )

PaXYaTYak*-TabuiÖTvaà Sa PaXYaiTa duMaRiTa" )) 16 ))

tatraivaà sati kartäram
ätmänaà kevalaà tu yaù

paçyaty akåta-buddhitvän
na sa paçyati durmatiù

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; evam—thus; sati—being; kartäram—the worker;
ätmänam—himself; kevalam—only; tu—but; yaù—anyone who; paçyati—sees;
akåta-buddhitvät—due to unintelligence; na—never; saù—he; paçyati—sees;
durmatiù—foolish.

TRANSLATION

Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the five

factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things as they are.

PURPORT

A foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a friend
within and conducting his actions. Although the material causes are the place,
the  worker,  the  endeavor  and  the  senses,  the  final  cause  is  the  Supreme,  the
Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should see not only the four material
causes  but  the  supreme  efficient  cause  as  well.  One  who  does  not  see  the
Supreme thinks himself to be the doer.

TEXT

 17

YaSYa Naah&k*/=Taae >aavae buiÖYaRSYa Na il/PYaTae )

hTvaiPa Sa wMaamçaek-aà hiNTa Na iNabDYaTae )) 17 ))

yasya nähaìkåto bhävo
buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatväpi sa imäû lokän
na hanti na nibadhyate

SYNONYMS

yasya—one whose; na—never; ahaìkåtaù—of false ego; bhävaù—nature;
buddhiù—intelligence; yasya—one whose; na—never; lipyate—is attached;
hatvä—killing; api—even; saù—he; imän—this; lokän—world; na—never;
hanti—kills; na—never; nibadhyate—becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled,
though he kills men in this world, does not kill. Nor is he bound by his actions.

PURPORT

In  this  verse  the  Lord  informs  Arjuna  that  the  desire  not  to  fight  arises
from false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action, but he did not
consider the supreme sanction within and without. If one does not know that a
supersanction is there, why should he act? But one who knows the instruments
of  work,  himself  as  the  worker,  and  the  Supreme  Lord  as  the  supreme
sanctioner  is  perfect  in  doing  everything.  Such  a  person  is  never  in  illusion.
Personal  activity  and  responsibility  arise  from  false  ego  and  godlessness,  or  a
lack  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Anyone  who  is  acting  in  Kåñëa  consciousness
under the direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
even  though  killing,  does  not  kill.  Nor  is  he  ever  affected  by  the  reaction  of
such killing. When a soldier kills under the command of a superior officer, he
is not subject to be judged. But if a soldier kills on his own personal account,
then he is certainly judged by a court of law.

TEXT

 18

jaNa& jeYa& PairjaTaa i}aivDaa k-MaRcaedNaa )

k-r<a& k-MaR k-TaeRiTa i}aivDa" k-MaRSa°h" )) 18 ))

jïänaà jïeyaà parijïätä
tri-vidhä karma-codanä
karaëaà karma karteti
tri-vidhaù karma-saìgrahaù

SYNONYMS

jïänam—knowledge; jïeyam—the objective of knowledge; parijïätä—the
knower; tri-vidhä—of three kinds; karma—of work; codanä—the impetus;
karaëam—the senses; karma—the work; kartä—the doer; iti—thus;
tri-vidhaù—of three kinds; karma—of work; saìgrahaù—the accumulation.

TRANSLATION

Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the three factors

that motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer are the three
constituents of action.

PURPORT

There  are  three  kinds  of  impetus  for  daily  work:  knowledge,  the  object  of
knowledge, and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itself and the
worker  are  called  the  constituents  of  work.  Any  work  done  by  any  human
being  has  these  elements.  Before  one  acts,  there  is  some  impetus,  which  is
called inspiration. Any solution arrived at before work is actualized is a subtle
form of work. Then work takes the form of action. First one has to undergo the
psychological  processes  of  thinking,  feeling  and  willing,  and  that  is  called
impetus. The inspiration to work is the same if it comes from the scripture or
from the instruction of the spiritual master. When the inspiration is there and
the worker is there, then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses,
including the mind, which is the center of all the senses. The sum total of all
the constituents of an activity are called the accumulation of work.

TEXT  19

jaNa& k-MaR c k-TaaR c i}aDaEv Gau<a>aedTa" )

Pa[aeCYaTae Gau<aSa&:YaaNae YaQaavC^*<au TaaNYaiPa )) 19 ))

jïänaà karma ca kartä ca
tridhaiva guëa-bhedataù
procyate guëa-saìkhyäne
yathävac chåëu täny api

SYNONYMS

jïänam—knowledge; karma—work; ca—also; kartä—worker; ca—also;
tridhä—of three kinds; eva—certainly; guëa-bhedataù—in terms of different
modes of material nature; procyate—are said; guëa-saìkhyäne—in terms of
different modes; yathä-vat—as they are; çåëu—hear; täni—all of them;
api—also.

TRANSLATION

According to the three different modes of material nature, there are three
kinds of knowledge, action and performer of action. Now hear of them from
Me.

PURPORT

In  the  Fourteenth  Chapter  the  three  divisions  of  the  modes  of  material
nature were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that the mode of
goodness  is  illuminating,  the  mode  of  passion  materialistic,  and  the  mode  of
ignorance  conducive  to  laziness  and  indolence.  All  the  modes  of  material
nature  are  binding;  they  are  not  sources  of  liberation.  Even  in  the  mode  of
goodness one is conditioned. In the Seventeenth Chapter, the different types
of  worship  by  different  types  of  men  in  different  modes  of  material  nature
were described. In this verse, the Lord says that He wishes to speak about the
different  types  of  knowledge,  workers  and  work  itself  according  to  the  three

material modes.

TEXT  20

SavR>aUTaezu YaeNaEk&- >aavMaVYaYaMaq+aTae )

Aiv>a¢&- iv>a¢e-zu TaJjaNa& iviÖ Saaitvk-Ma( )) 20 ))

sarva-bhüteñu yenaikaà
bhävam avyayam ékñate
avibhaktaà vibhakteñu
taj jïänaà viddhi sättvikam

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhüteñu—in all living entities; yena—by which; ekam—one;
bhävam—situation; avyayam—imperishable; ékñate—one sees;
avibhaktam—undivided; vibhakteñu—in the numberless divided; tat—that;
jïänam—knowledge; viddhi—know; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all living

entities, though they are divided into innumerable forms, you should
understand to be in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

A person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a demigod,
human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possesses knowledge in the
mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spirit soul is there, although they
have  different  bodies  in  terms  of  their  previous  work.  As  described  in  the
Seventh Chapter, the manifestation of the living force in every body is due to
the superior nature of the Supreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature,
that living force, in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living

energy  is  imperishable,  although  the  bodies  are  perishable.  Differences  are
perceived  in  terms  of  the  body;  because  there  are  many  forms  of  material
existence  in  conditional  life,  the  living  force  appears  to  be  divided.  Such
impersonal knowledge is an aspect of self-realization.

TEXT  21

Pa*Qa¤e-Na Tau YaJjaNa& NaaNaa>aavaNPa*QaiGvDaaNa( )

veita SaveRzu >aUTaezu TaJjaNa& iviÖ raJaSaMa( )) 21 ))

påthaktvena tu yaj jïänaà
nänä-bhävän påthag-vidhän
vetti sarveñu bhüteñu
taj jïänaà viddhi räjasam

SYNONYMS

påthaktvena—because of division; tu—but; yat—which; jïänam—knowledge;
nänä-bhävän—multifarious situations; påthak-vidhän—different; vetti—knows;
sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living entities; tat—that; jïänam—knowledge;
viddhi—must be known; räjasam—in terms of passion.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge by which one sees that in every different body there is a

different type of living entity you should understand to be in the mode of
passion.

PURPORT

The  concept  that  the  material  body  is  the  living  entity  and  that  with  the
destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed is called knowledge
in  the  mode  of  passion.  According  to  that  knowledge,  bodies  differ  from  one
another  because  of  the  development  of  different  types  of  consciousness,

otherwise there is no separate soul which manifests consciousness. The body is
itself  the  soul,  and  there  is  no  separate  soul  beyond  the  body.  According  to
such  knowledge,  consciousness  is  temporary.  Or  else  there  are  no  individual
souls,  but  there  is  an  all-pervading  soul,  which  is  full  of  knowledge,  and  this
body is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this body there is
no  special  individual  or  supreme  soul.  All  such  conceptions  are  considered
products of the mode of passion.

TEXT  22

Yatau k*-Tòvdek-iSMaNk-aYaeR Sa¢-MahETauk-Ma( )

ATatvaQaRvdLPa& c TataaMaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 22 ))

yat tu kåtsna-vad ekasmin
kärye saktam ahaitukam
atattvärtha-vad alpaà ca
tat tämasam udähåtam

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; tu—but; kåtsna-vat—as all in all; ekasmin—in one;
kärye—work; saktam—attached; ahaitukam—without cause;
atattva-artha-vat—without knowledge of reality; alpam—very meager;
ca—and; tat—that; tämasam—in the mode of darkness; udähåtam—is said to
be.

TRANSLATION

And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all
in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in
the mode of darkness.

PURPORT

The “knowledge” of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or
ignorance because every living entity in conditional life is born into the mode
of ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the authorities or
scriptural  injunctions  has  knowledge  that  is  limited  to  the  body.  He  is  not
concerned about acting in terms of the directions of scripture. For him God is
money,  and  knowledge  means  the  satisfaction  of  bodily  demands.  Such
knowledge has no connection with the Absolute Truth. It is more or less like
the  knowledge  of  the  ordinary  animals:  the  knowledge  of  eating,  sleeping,
defending and mating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the
mode of darkness. In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyond
this  body  is  called  knowledge  in  the  mode  of  goodness,  knowledge  producing
many theories and doctrines by dint of mundane logic and mental speculation
is  the  product  of  the  mode  of  passion,  and  knowledge  concerned  only  with
keeping the body comfortable is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT  23

iNaYaTa& Sa®rihTaMaraGaÜezTa" k*-TaMa( )

Af-l/Pa[ePSauNaa k-MaR YataTSaaitvk-MauCYaTae )) 23 ))

niyataà saìga-rahitam
aräga-dveñataù kåtam
aphala-prepsunä karma
yat tat sättvikam ucyate

SYNONYMS

niyatam—regulated; saìga-rahitam—without attachment;
aräga-dveñataù—without love or hatred; kåtam—done; aphala-prepsunä—by
one without desire for fruitive result; karma—action; yat—which; tat—that;
sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

That action which is regulated and which is performed without attachment,
without love or hatred, and without desire for fruitive results is said to be in the
mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Regulated  occupational  duties,  as  prescribed  in  the  scriptures  in  terms  of
the different orders and divisions of society, performed without attachment or
proprietary rights and therefore without any love or hatred, and performed in
Kåñëa  consciousness 
the  Supreme,  without
self-satisfaction  or  self-gratification,  are  called  actions  in  the  mode  of
goodness.

satisfaction  of 

the 

for 

TEXT

 24

Yatau k-aMaePSauNaa k-MaR Saahªare<a va PauNa" )

i§-YaTae bhul/aYaaSa& Tad]aJaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 24 ))

yat tu kämepsunä karma
sähaìkäreëa vä punaù
kriyate bahuläyäsaà
tad räjasam udähåtam

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; tu—but; käma-épsunä—by one with desires for fruitive
results; karma—work; sa-ahaìkäreëa—with ego; vä—or; punaù—again;
kriyate—is performed; bahula-äyäsam—with great labor; tat—that;
räjasam—in the mode of passion; udähåtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his desires,

and enacted from a sense of false ego, is called action in the mode of passion.

TEXT  25

ANaubNDa& +aYa& ih&SaaMaNaPae+Ya c PaaEåzMa( )

Maaehadar>YaTae k-MaR YatataaMaSaMauCYaTae )) 25 ))

anubandhaà kñayaà hiàsäm
anapekñya ca pauruñam
mohäd ärabhyate karma
yat tat tämasam ucyate

SYNONYMS

anubandham—of future bondage; kñayam—destruction; hiàsäm—and distress
to others; anapekñya—without considering the consequences; ca—also;
pauruñam—self-sanctioned; mohät—by illusion; ärabhyate—is begun;
karma—work; yat—which; tat—that; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance;
ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

That action performed in illusion, in disregard of scriptural injunctions, and
without concern for future bondage or for violence or distress caused to others
is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

One has to give account of one’s actions to the state or to the agents of the
Supreme Lord called the Yamadütas. Irresponsible work is destructive because

it  destroys  the  regulative  principles  of  scriptural  injunction.  It  is  often  based
on violence and is distressing to other living entities. Such irresponsible work
is carried out in the light of one’s personal experience. This is called illusion.
And all such illusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.

TEXT  26

Mau¢-Sa®ae_Nah&vadq Da*TYauTSaahSaMaiNvTa" )

iSaÖyiSaÖyaeiNaRivRk-ar" k-TaaR Saaitvk- oCYaTae )) 26 ))

mukta-saìgo ’nahaà-vädé
dhåty-utsäha-samanvitaù
siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikäraù
kartä sättvika ucyate

SYNONYMS

mukta-saìgaù—liberated from all material association; anaham-vädé—without
false ego; dhåti—with determination; utsäha—and great enthusiasm;
samanvitaù—qualified; siddhi—in perfection; asiddhyoù—and failure;
nirvikäraù—without change; kartä—worker; sättvikaù—in the mode of
goodness; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

One who performs his duty without association with the modes of material

nature, without false ego, with great determination and enthusiasm, and
without wavering in success or failure is said to be a worker in the mode of
goodness.

PURPORT

A  person  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  always  transcendental  to  the  material
modes of nature. He has no expectations for the result of the work entrusted to

him, because he is above false ego and pride. Still, he is always enthusiastic till
the completion of such work. He does not worry about the distress undertaken;
he is always enthusiastic. He does not care for success or failure; he is equal in
both distress and happiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of goodness.

TEXT

 27

raGaq k-MaRf-l/Pa[ePSaulu/RBDaae ih&SaaTMak-ae_éuic" )

hzRXaaek-aiNvTa" k-TaaR raJaSa" Pairk-IiTaRTa" )) 27 ))

rägé karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho hiàsätmako ’çuciù
harña-çokänvitaù kartä
räjasaù parikértitaù

SYNONYMS

rägé—very much attached; karma-phala—the fruit of the work;
prepsuù—desiring; lubdhaù—greedy; hiàsä-ätmakaù—always envious;
açuciù—unclean; harña-çoka-anvitaù—subject to joy and sorrow; kartä—such a
worker; räjasaù—in the mode of passion; parikértitaù—is declared.

TRANSLATION

The worker who is attached to work and the fruits of work, desiring to enjoy

those fruits, and who is greedy, always envious, impure, and moved by joy and
sorrow, is said to be in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

A  person  is  too  much  attached  to  a  certain  kind  of  work  or  to  the  result
because he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth and home, wife
and  children.  Such  a  person  has  no  desire  for  higher  elevation  in  life.  He  is
simply concerned with making this world as materially comfortable as possible.

He  is  generally  very  greedy,  and  he  thinks  that  anything  attained  by  him  is
permanent  and  never  to  be  lost.  Such  a  person  is  envious  of  others  and
prepared to do anything wrong for sense gratification. Therefore such a person
is unclean, and he does not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is
very happy if his work is successful and very much distressed when his work is
not successful. Such is the worker in the mode of passion.

TEXT  28

AYau¢-" Pa[ak*-Ta" STaBDa" Xa#=ae NaEZk*-iTak-ae_l/Sa" )

ivzadq dqgaRSaU}aq c k-TaaR TaaMaSa oCYaTae )) 28 ))

ayuktaù präkåtaù stabdhaù
çaöho naiñkåtiko ’lasaù
viñädé dérgha-sütré ca
kartä tämasa ucyate

SYNONYMS

ayuktaù—not referring to the scriptural injunctions; präkåtaù—materialistic;
stabdhaù—obstinate; çaöhaù—deceitful; naiñkåtikaù—expert in insulting
others; alasaù—lazy; viñädé—morose; dérgha-sütré—procrastinating; ca—also;
kartä—worker; tämasaù—in the mode of ignorance; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

The worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions of the

scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expert in insulting
others, and who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating is said to be a worker
in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

In the scriptural injunctions we find what sort of work should be performed

and  what  sort  of  work  should  not  be  performed.  Those  who  do  not  care  for
those  injunctions  engage  in  work  not  to  be  done,  and  such  persons  are
generally  materialistic.  They  work  according  to  the  modes  of  nature,  not
according to the injunctions of the scripture. Such workers are not very gentle,
and generally they are always cunning and expert in insulting others. They are
very  lazy;  even  though  they  have  some  duty,  they  do  not  do  it  properly,  and
they put it aside to be done later on. Therefore they appear to be morose. They
procrastinate; anything which can be done in an hour they drag on for years.
Such workers are situated in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT  29

buÖe>aeRd& Da*TaeêEv Gau<aTaiñivDa& é*<au )

Pa[aeCYaMaaNaMaXaeze<a Pa*Qa¤e-Na DaNaÅYa )) 29 ))

buddher bhedaà dhåteç caiva
guëatas tri-vidhaà çåëu
procyamänam açeñeëa
påthaktvena dhanaïjaya

SYNONYMS

buddheù—of intelligence; bhedam—the differences; dhåteù—of steadiness;
ca—also; eva—certainly; guëataù—by the modes of material nature;
tri-vidham—of three kinds; çåëu—just hear; procyamänam—as described by
Me; açeñeëa—in detail; påthaktvena—differently; dhanaïjaya—O winner of
wealth.

TRANSLATION

O winner of wealth, now please listen as I tell you in detail of the different

kinds of understanding and determination, according to the three modes of
material nature.

PURPORT

Now after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower,
in  three  different  divisions  according  to  the  modes  of  material  nature,  the
Lord  is  explaining  the  intelligence  and  determination  of  the  worker  in  the
same way.

TEXT  30

Pa[v*ita& c iNav*ita& c k-aYaaRk-aYaeR >aYaa>aYae )

bNDa& Maae+a& c Yaa veita buiÖ" Saa PaaQaR Saaitvk-I )) 30 ))

pravåttià ca nivåttià ca
käryäkärye bhayäbhaye
bandhaà mokñaà ca yä vetti
buddhiù sä pärtha sättviké

SYNONYMS

pravåttim—doing; ca—also; nivåttim—not doing; ca—and; kärya—what ought
to be done; akärye—and what ought not to be done; bhaya—fear; abhaye—and
fearlessness; bandham—bondage; mokñam—liberation; ca—and; yä—that
which; vetti—knows; buddhiù—understanding; sä—that; pärtha—O son of
Påthä; sättviké—in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be
done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is not to be
feared, what is binding and what is liberating, is in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Performing  actions  in  terms  of  the  directions  of  the  scriptures  is  called
pravåtti, or executing actions that deserve to be performed. And actions which
are  not  so  directed  are  not  to  be  performed.  One  who  does  not  know  the
scriptural directions becomes entangled in the actions and reactions of work.
Understanding which discriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of
goodness.

TEXT  31

YaYaa DaMaRMaDaMa| c k-aYa| cak-aYaRMaev c )

AYaQaavTPa[JaaNaaiTa buiÖ" Saa PaaQaR raJaSaq )) 31 ))

yayä dharmam adharmaà ca
käryaà cäkäryam eva ca
ayathävat prajänäti
buddhiù sä pärtha räjasé

SYNONYMS

yayä—by which; dharmam—the principles of religion; adharmam—irreligion;
ca—and; käryam—what ought to be done; ca—also; akäryam—what ought
not to be done; eva—certainly; ca—also; ayathä-vat—imperfectly;
prajänäti—knows; buddhiù—intelligence; sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
räjasé—in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, that understanding which cannot distinguish between
religion and irreligion, between action that should be done and action that
should not be done, is in the mode of passion.

TEXT  32

ADaMa| DaMaRiMaiTa Yaa MaNYaTae TaMaSaav*Taa )

SavaRQaaRiNvParqTaa&ê buiÖ" Saa PaaQaR TaaMaSaq )) 32 ))

adharmaà dharmam iti yä
manyate tamasävåtä
sarvärthän viparétäàç ca
buddhiù sä pärtha tämasé

SYNONYMS

adharmam—irreligion; dharmam—religion; iti—thus; yä—which;
manyate—thinks; tamasä—by illusion; ävåtä—covered; sarva-arthän—all
things; viparétän—in the wrong direction; ca—also; buddhiù—intelligence;
sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; tämasé—in the mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and religion to
be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness, and strives always in the
wrong direction, O Pärtha, is in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

Intelligence in the mode of ignorance is always working the opposite of the
way it should. It accepts religions which are not actually religions and rejects
actual religion. Men in ignorance understand a great soul to be a common man
and accept a common man as a great soul. They think truth to be untruth and
accept  untruth  as  truth.  In  all  activities  they  simply  take  the  wrong  path;
therefore their intelligence is in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT

 33

Da*TYaa YaYaa DaarYaTae MaNa"Pa[a<aeiNd]Yai§-Yaa" )

YaaeGaeNaaVYai>acair<Yaa Da*iTa" Saa PaaQaR Saaitvk-I )) 33 ))

dhåtyä yayä dhärayate
manaù-präëendriya-kriyäù
yogenävyabhicäriëyä
dhåtiù sä pärtha sättviké

SYNONYMS

dhåtyä—determination; yayä—by which; dhärayate—one sustains; manaù—of
the mind; präëa—life; indriya—and senses; kriyäù—the activities; yogena—by
yoga practice; avyabhicäriëyä—without any break; dhåtiù—determination;
sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; sättviké—in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained
with steadfastness by yoga practice, and which thus controls the activities of the
mind, life and senses is determination in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Yoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily fixed
in  the  Supreme  Soul  with  determination,  concentrating  one’s  mind,  life  and
sensory  activities  on  the  Supreme,  engages  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  That  sort
of determination is in the mode of goodness. The word avyabhicäriëyä is very
significant,  for  it  indicates  that  persons  who  are  engaged  in  Kåñëa
consciousness are never deviated by any other activity.

TEXT  34

YaYaa Tau DaMaRk-aMaaQaaRNDa*TYaa DaarYaTae_JauRNa )

Pa[Sa®eNa f-l/ak-a¿q Da*iTa" Saa PaaQaR raJaSaq )) 34 ))

yayä tu dharma-kämärthän
dhåtyä dhärayate ’rjuna
prasaìgena phaläkäìkñé
dhåtiù sä pärtha räjasé

SYNONYMS

yayä—by which; tu—but; dharma—religiosity; käma—sense gratification;
arthän—and economic development; dhåtyä—by determination;
dhärayate—one sustains; arjuna—O Arjuna; prasaìgena—because of
attachment; phala-äkäìkñé—desiring fruitive results; dhåtiù—determination;
sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; räjasé—in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

But that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in religion,

economic development and sense gratification is of the nature of passion, O
Arjuna.

PURPORT

Any  person  who  is  always  desirous  of  fruitive  results  in  religious  or
economic activities, whose only desire is sense gratification, and whose mind,
life and senses are thus engaged is in the mode of passion.

TEXT  35

YaYaa SvPan& >aYa& Xaaek&- ivzad& MadMaev c )

Na ivMauÄiTa duMaeRDaa Da*iTa" Saa PaaQaR TaaMaSaq )) 35 ))

yayä svapnaà bhayaà çokaà
viñädaà madam eva ca
na vimuïcati durmedhä
dhåtiù sä pärtha tämasé

SYNONYMS

yayä—by which; svapnam—dreaming; bhayam—fearfulness;
çokam—lamentation; viñädam—moroseness; madam—illusion; eva—certainly;
ca—also; na—never; vimuïcati—one gives up; durmedhä—unintelligent;
dhåtiù—determination; sä—that; pärtha—O son of Påthä; tämasé—in the
mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness,
lamentation, moroseness and illusion—such unintelligent determination, O son
of Påthä, is in the mode of darkness.

PURPORT

It should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does not
dream. Here “dream” means too much sleep. Dreaming is always present; either
in  the  mode  of  goodness,  passion  or  ignorance,  dreaming  is  a  natural
occurrence.  But  those  who  cannot  avoid  oversleeping,  who  cannot  avoid  the
pride of enjoying material objects, who are always dreaming of lording it over
the  material  world,  and  whose  life,  mind  and  senses  are  thus  engaged,  are
considered to have determination in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT  36

Sau%& iTvdaNaq& i}aivDa& é*<au Mae >arTazR>a )

A>YaaSaad]MaTae Ya}a du"%aNTa& c iNaGaC^iTa )) 36 ))

sukhaà tv idänéà tri-vidhaà
çåëu me bharatarñabha
abhyäsäd ramate yatra
duùkhäntaà ca nigacchati

SYNONYMS

sukham—happiness; tu—but; idäném—now; tri-vidham—of three kinds;
çåëu—hear; me—from Me; bharata-åñabha—O best amongst the Bhäratas;
abhyäsät—by practice; ramate—one enjoys; yatra—where; duùkha—of
distress; antam—the end; ca—also; nigacchati—gains.

TRANSLATION

O best of the Bhäratas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds of
happiness by which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he sometimes
comes to the end of all distress.

PURPORT

A conditioned soul tries to enjoy material happiness again and again. Thus
he  chews  the  chewed.  But  sometimes,  in  the  course  of  such  enjoyment,  he
becomes relieved from material entanglement by association with a great soul.
In  other  words,  a  conditioned  soul  is  always  engaged  in  some  type  of  sense
gratification,  but  when  he  understands  by  good  association  that  it  is  only  a
repetition  of  the  same  thing,  and  he  is  awakened  to  his  real  Kåñëa
consciousness,  he  is  sometimes  relieved  from  such  repetitive  so-called
happiness.

TEXT  37

YatadGa]e ivziMav Pair<aaMae_Ma*TaaePaMaMa( )

TaTSau%& Saaitvk&- Pa[ae¢-MaaTMabuiÖPa[SaadJaMa( )) 37 ))

yat tad agre viñam iva
pariëäme ’måtopamam
tat sukhaà sättvikaà proktam
ätma-buddhi-prasäda-jam

SYNONYMS

yat—which; tat—that; agre—in the beginning; viñam iva—like poison;
pariëäme—at the end; amåta—nectar; upamam—compared to; tat—that;
sukham—happiness; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; proktam—is said;
ätma—in the self; buddhi—of intelligence; prasäda-jam—born of the
satisfaction.

TRANSLATION

That which in the beginning may be just like poison but at the end is just
like nectar and which awakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in
the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

In  the  pursuit  of  self-realization,  one  has  to  follow  many  rules  and
regulations to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate the mind on
the self. All these procedures are very difficult, bitter like poison, but if one is
successful  in  following  the  regulations  and  comes  to  the  transcendental
position, he begins to drink real nectar, and he enjoys life.

TEXT  38

ivzYaeiNd]YaSa&YaaeGaaÛtadGa]e_Ma*TaaePaMaMa( )

Pair<aaMae ivziMav TaTSau%& raJaSa& SMa*TaMa( )) 38 ))

viñayendriya-saàyogäd
yat tad agre ’måtopamam
pariëäme viñam iva
tat sukhaà räjasaà småtam

SYNONYMS

viñaya—of the objects of the senses; indriya—and the senses; saàyogät—from
the combination; yat—which; tat—that; agre—in the beginning;
amåta-upamam—just like nectar; pariëäme—at the end; viñam iva—like
poison; tat—that; sukham—happiness; räjasam—in the mode of passion;
småtam—is considered.

TRANSLATION

That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their objects

and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end is said to be of the
nature of passion.

PURPORT

A  young  man  and  a  young  woman  meet,  and  the  senses  drive  the  young
man to see her, to touch her and to have sexual intercourse. In the beginning
this may be very pleasing to the senses, but at the end, or after some time, it
becomes  just  like  poison.  They  are  separated  or  there  is  divorce,  there  is
lamentation,  there  is  sorrow,  etc.  Such  happiness  is  always  in  the  mode  of
passion.  Happiness  derived  from  a  combination  of  the  senses  and  the  sense
objects is always a cause of distress and should be avoided by all means.

TEXT  39

YadGa]e caNaubNDae c Sau%& MaaehNaMaaTMaNa" )

iNad]al/SYaPa[MaadaeTQa& TataaMaSaMaudaôTaMa( )) 39 ))

yad agre cänubandhe ca
sukhaà mohanam ätmanaù
nidrälasya-pramädotthaà
tat tämasam udähåtam

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; agre—in the beginning; ca—also; anubandhe—at the end;
ca—also; sukham—happiness; mohanam—illusory; ätmanaù—of the self;
nidrä—sleep; älasya—laziness; pramäda—and illusion; uttham—produced of;
tat—that; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance; udähåtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from
beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to be
of the nature of ignorance.

PURPORT

One who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the mode of
darkness, ignorance, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to act is
also  in  the  mode  of  ignorance.  For  the  person  in  the  mode  of  ignorance,
everything is illusion. There is no happiness either in the beginning or at the
end.  For  the  person  in  the  mode  of  passion  there  might  be  some  kind  of
ephemeral  happiness  in  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  distress,  but  for  the
person  in  the  mode  of  ignorance  there  is  only  distress  both  in  the  beginning
and at the end.

TEXT  40

Na TadiSTa Pa*iQaVYaa& va idiv devezu va PauNa" )

Satv& Pa[k*-iTaJaEMauR¢&- Yadei>a" SYaaiT}ai>aGauR<aE" )) 40 ))

na tad asti påthivyäà vä
divi deveñu vä punaù
sattvaà prakåti-jair muktaà
yad ebhiù syät tribhir guëaiù

SYNONYMS

na—not; tat—that; asti—there is; påthivyäm—on the earth; vä—or; divi—in
the higher planetary system; deveñu—amongst the demigods; vä—or;
punaù—again; sattvam—existence; prakåti-jaiù—born of material nature;
muktam—liberated; yat—that; ebhiù—from the influence of these; syät—is;
tribhiù—three; guëaiù—modes of material nature.

TRANSLATION

There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher

planetary systems, which is freed from these three modes born of material
nature.

PURPORT

The  Lord  here  summarizes  the  total  influence  of  the  three  modes  of

material nature all over the universe.

TEXT  41

b]aø<a+ai}aYaivXaa& éUd]a<aa& c ParNTaPa )

k-MaaRi<a Pa[iv>a¢-aiNa Sv>aavPa[>avEGauR<aE" )) 41 ))

brähmaëa-kñatriya-viçäà
çüdräëäà ca parantapa
karmäëi pravibhaktäni
svabhäva-prabhavair guëaiù

SYNONYMS

brähmaëa—of the brähmaëas; kñatriya—the kñatriyas; viçäm—and the
vaiçyas; çüdräëäm—of the çüdras; ca—and; parantapa—O subduer of the
enemies; karmäëi—the activities; pravibhaktäni—are divided; svabhäva—their
own nature; prabhavaiù—born of; guëaiù—by the modes of material nature.

TRANSLATION

Brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras are distinguished by the qualities
born of their own natures in accordance with the material modes, O chastiser of
the enemy.

TEXT  42

XaMaae dMaSTaPa" XaaEc& +aaiNTaraJaRvMaev c )

jaNa& ivjaNaMaaiSTaKYa& b]øk-MaR Sv>aavJaMa( )) 42 ))

çamo damas tapaù çaucaà
kñäntir ärjavam eva ca
jïänaà vijïänam ästikyaà
brahma-karma svabhäva-jam

SYNONYMS

çamaù—peacefulness; damaù—self-control; tapaù—austerity; çaucam—purity;
kñäntiù—tolerance; ärjavam—honesty; eva—certainly; ca—and;
jïänam—knowledge; vijïänam—wisdom; ästikyam—religiousness; brahma—of
a brähmaëa; karma—duty; svabhäva-jam—born of his own nature.

TRANSLATION

Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, knowledge,

wisdom and religiousness—these are the natural qualities by which the
brähmaëas work.

TEXT

 43

XaaEYa| TaeJaae Da*iTadaR+Ya& YauÖe caPYaPal/aYaNaMa( )

daNaMaqìr>aavê +aa}a& k-MaR Sv>aavJaMa( )) 43 ))

çauryaà tejo dhåtir däkñyaà
yuddhe cäpy apaläyanam
dänam éçvara-bhävaç ca
kñätraà karma svabhäva-jam

SYNONYMS

çauryam—heroism; tejaù—power; dhåtiù—determination;
däkñyam—resourcefulness; yuddhe—in battle; ca—and; api—also;
apaläyanam—not fleeing; dänam—generosity; éçvara—of leadership;
bhävaù—the nature; ca—and; kñätram—of a kñatriya; karma—duty;
svabhäva-jam—born of his own nature.

TRANSLATION

Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle,

generosity and leadership are the natural qualities of work for the kñatriyas.

TEXT  44

k*-izGaaer+Yavai<aJYa& vEXYak-MaR Sv>aavJaMa( )

PaircYaaRTMak&- k-MaR éUd]SYaaiPa Sv>aavJaMa( )) 44 ))

kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyaà
vaiçya-karma svabhäva-jam
paricaryätmakaà karma
çüdrasyäpi svabhäva-jam

SYNONYMS

kåñi—plowing; go—of cows; rakñya—protection; väëijyam—trade; vaiçya—of a
vaiçya; karma—duty; svabhäva-jam—born of his own nature;

paricaryä—service; ätmakam—consisting of; karma—duty; çüdrasya—of the
çüdra; api—also; svabhäva-jam—born of his own nature.

TRANSLATION

Farming, cow protection and business are the natural work for the vaiçyas,

and for the çüdras there is labor and service to others.

TEXT  45

Sve Sve k-MaR<Yai>arTa" Sa&iSaiÖ& l/>aTae Nar" )

Svk-MaRiNarTa" iSaiÖ& YaQaa ivNdiTa TaC^*<au )) 45 ))

sve sve karmaëy abhirataù
saàsiddhià labhate naraù
sva-karma-nirataù siddhià
yathä vindati tac chåëu

SYNONYMS

sve sve—each his own; karmaëi—work; abhirataù—following;
saàsiddhim—perfection; labhate—achieves; naraù—a man; sva-karma—in his
own duty; nirataù—engaged; siddhim—perfection; yathä—as; vindati—attains;
tat—that; çåëu—listen.

TRANSLATION

By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now

please hear from Me how this can be done.

TEXT

 46

YaTa" Pa[v*ita>aURTaaNaa& YaeNa SavRiMad& TaTaMa( )

Svk-MaR<aa TaMa>YaCYaR iSaiÖ& ivNdiTa MaaNav" )) 46 ))

yataù pravåttir bhütänäà
yena sarvam idaà tatam
sva-karmaëä tam abhyarcya
siddhià vindati mänavaù

SYNONYMS

yataù—from whom; pravåttiù—the emanation; bhütänäm—of all living
entities; yena—by whom; sarvam—all; idam—this; tatam—is pervaded;
sva-karmaëä—by his own duties; tam—Him; abhyarcya—by worshiping;
siddhim—perfection; vindati—achieves; mänavaù—a man.

TRANSLATION

By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is

all-pervading, a man can attain perfection through performing his own work.

PURPORT

As  stated  in  the  Fifteenth  Chapter,  all  living  beings  are  fragmental  parts
and parcels of the Supreme Lord. Thus the Supreme Lord is the beginning of
all living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedänta-sütra—janmädy asya yataù
[SB 1.1.1]. The Supreme Lord is therefore the beginning of life of every living
entity.  And  as  stated  in  the  Seventh  Chapter  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  the  Supreme
Lord,  by  His  two  energies,  His  external  energy  and  internal  energy,  is
all-pervading.  Therefore  one  should  worship  the  Supreme  Lord  with  His
energies. Generally the Vaiñëava devotees worship the Supreme Lord with His
internal  energy.  His  external  energy  is  a  perverted  reflection  of  the  internal
energy.  The  external  energy  is  a  background,  but  the  Supreme  Lord  by  the
expansion  of  His plenary portion as Paramätmä is situated everywhere. He is
the Supersoul of all demigods, all human beings, all animals, everywhere. One
should therefore know that as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord one has his

duty  to  render  service  unto  the  Supreme.  Everyone  should  be  engaged  in
devotional  service  to  the  Lord  in  full  Kåñëa  consciousness.  That  is
recommended in this verse.

Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type of occupation
by Håñékeça, the master of the senses. And by the result of the work in which
one  is  engaged,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa,  should  be
worshiped. If one thinks always in this way, in full Kåñëa consciousness, then,
by  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  he  becomes  fully  aware  of  everything.  That  is  the
perfection  of  life.  The  Lord  says  in  Bhagavad-gétä  (12.7),  teñäm  ahaà
samuddhartä.  The  Supreme  Lord  Himself  takes  charge  of  delivering  such  a
devotee. That is the highest perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may
be  engaged,  if  he  serves  the  Supreme  Lord  he  will  achieve  the  highest
perfection.

TEXT  47

é[eYaaNSvDaMaaeR ivGau<a" ParDaMaaRTSvNauiïTaaTa( )

Sv>aaviNaYaTa& k-MaR ku-vRàaPanaeiTa ik-iLbzMa( )) 47 ))

çreyän sva-dharmo viguëaù
para-dharmät sv-anuñöhität
svabhäva-niyataà karma
kurvan näpnoti kilbiñam

SYNONYMS

çreyän—better; sva-dharmaù—one’s own occupation; viguëaù—imperfectly
performed; para-dharmät—than another’s occupation;
su-anuñöhität—perfectly done; svabhäva-niyatam—prescribed according to
one’s nature; karma—work; kurvan—performing; na—never;
äpnoti—achieves; kilbiñam—sinful reactions.

TRANSLATION

It is better to engage in one’s own occupation, even though one may perform

it imperfectly, than to accept another’s occupation and perform it perfectly.
Duties prescribed according to one’s nature are never affected by sinful
reactions.

PURPORT

One’s occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gétä. As already discussed
in  previous  verses,  the  duties  of  a  brähmaëa,  kñatriya,  vaiçya  and  çüdra  are
prescribed  according  to  their  particular  modes  of  nature.  One  should  not
imitate another’s duty. A man who is by nature attracted to the kind of work
done by çüdras should not artificially claim to be a brähmaëa, although he may
have been born into a brähmaëa family. In this way one should work according
to  his  own  nature;  no  work  is  abominable,  if  performed  in  the  service  of  the
Supreme Lord. The occupational duty of a brähmaëa is certainly in the mode
of goodness, but if a person is not by nature in the mode of goodness, he should
not  imitate  the  occupational  duty  of  a  brähmaëa.  For  a  kñatriya,  or
administrator,  there  are  so  many  abominable  things;  a  kñatriya  has  to  be
violent to kill his enemies, and sometimes a kñatriya has to tell lies for the sake
of  diplomacy.  Such  violence  and  duplicity  accompany  political  affairs,  but  a
kñatriya is not supposed to give up his occupational duty and try to perform the
duties of a brähmaëa.

One  should  act  to  satisfy  the  Supreme  Lord.  For  example,  Arjuna  was  a
kñatriya.  He  was  hesitating  to  fight  the  other  party.  But  if  such  fighting  is
performed  for  the  sake  of  Kåñëa,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  there
need  be  no  fear  of  degradation.  In  the  business  field  also,  sometimes  a
merchant has to tell so many lies to make a profit. If he does not do so, there
can be no profit. Sometimes a merchant says, “Oh, my dear customer, for you I
am making no profit,” but one should know that without profit the merchant
cannot  exist.  Therefore  it  should  be  taken  as  a  simple  lie  if  a  merchant  says
that he is not making a profit. But the merchant should not think that because
he  is  engaged  in  an  occupation  in  which  the  telling  of  lies  is  compulsory,  he
should give up his profession and pursue the profession of a brähmaëa. That is

not  recommended.  Whether  one  is  a  kñatriya,  a  vaiçya,  or  a  çüdra  doesn’t
matter,  if  he  serves,  by  his  work,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Even
brähmaëas,  who  perform  different  types  of  sacrifice,  sometimes  must  kill
animals  because  sometimes  animals  are  sacrificed  in  such  ceremonies.
Similarly, if a kñatriya engaged in his own occupation kills an enemy, there is
no  sin  incurred.  In  the  Third  Chapter  these  matters  have  been  clearly  and
elaborately explained; every man should work for the purpose of Yajïa, or for
Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anything done for personal sense
gratification is a cause of bondage. The conclusion is that everyone should be
engaged  according  to  the  particular  mode  of  nature  he  has  acquired,  and  he
should decide to work only to serve the supreme cause of the Supreme Lord.

TEXT

 48

SahJa& k-MaR k-aENTaeYa SadaezMaiPa Na TYaJaeTa( )

SavaRrM>aa ih daeze<a DaUMaeNaaiGanirvav*Taa" )) 48 ))

saha-jaà karma kaunteya
sa-doñam api na tyajet
sarvärambhä hi doñeëa
dhümenägnir ivävåtäù

SYNONYMS

saha-jam—born simultaneously; karma—work; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
sa-doñam—with fault; api—although; na—never; tyajet—one should give up;
sarva-ärambhäù—all ventures; hi—certainly; doñeëa—with fault;
dhümena—with smoke; agniù—fire; iva—as; ävåtäù—covered.

TRANSLATION

Every endeavor is covered by some fault, just as fire is covered by smoke.
Therefore one should not give up the work born of his nature, O son of Kunté,
even if such work is full of fault.

PURPORT

In  conditioned  life,  all  work  is  contaminated  by  the  material  modes  of
nature. Even if one is a brähmaëa, he has to perform sacrifices in which animal
killing is necessary. Similarly, a kñatriya, however pious he may be, has to fight
enemies. He cannot avoid it. Similarly, a merchant, however pious he may be,
must sometimes hide his profit to stay in business, or he may sometimes have to
do business on the black market. These things are necessary; one cannot avoid
them. Similarly, even though a man is a çüdra serving a bad master, he has to
carry out the order of the master, even though it should not be done. Despite
these flaws, one should continue to carry out his prescribed duties, for they are
born out of his own nature.

A  very  nice  example  is  given  herein.  Although  fire  is  pure,  still  there  is
smoke. Yet smoke does not make the fire impure. Even though there is smoke
in the fire, fire is still considered to be the purest of all elements. If one prefers
to give up the work of a kñatriya and take up the occupation of a brähmaëa, he
is  not  assured  that  in  the  occupation  of  a  brähmaëa  there  are  no  unpleasant
duties.  One  may  then  conclude  that  in  the  material  world  no  one  can  be
completely  free  from  the  contamination  of  material  nature.  This  example  of
fire and smoke is very appropriate in this connection. When in wintertime one
takes a stone from the fire, sometimes smoke disturbs the eyes and other parts
of  the  body,  but  still  one  must  make  use  of  the  fire  despite  disturbing
conditions.  Similarly,  one  should  not  give  up  his  natural  occupation  because
there are some disturbing elements. Rather, one should be determined to serve
the Supreme Lord by his occupational duty in Kåñëa consciousness. That is the
perfectional point. When a particular type of occupation is performed for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Lord, all the defects in that particular occupation
are  purified.  When  the  results  of  work  are  purified,  when  connected  with
devotional  service,  one  becomes  perfect  in  seeing  the  self  within,  and  that  is
self-realization.

TEXT  49

ASa¢-buiÖ" SavR}a iJaTaaTMaa ivGaTaSPa*h" )

NaEZk-MYaRiSaiÖ& ParMaa& SaNNYaaSaeNaaiDaGaC^iTa )) 49 ))

asakta-buddhiù sarvatra
jitätmä vigata-spåhaù
naiñkarmya-siddhià paramäà
sannyäsenädhigacchati

SYNONYMS

asakta-buddhiù—having unattached intelligence; sarvatra—everywhere;
jita-ätmä—having control of the mind; vigata-spåhaù—without material
desires; naiñkarmya-siddhim—the perfection of nonreaction;
paramäm—supreme; sannyäsena—by the renounced order of life;
adhigacchati—one attains.

TRANSLATION

One who is self-controlled and unattached and who disregards all material
enjoyments can obtain, by practice of renunciation, the highest perfect stage of
freedom from reaction.

PURPORT

Real  renunciation  means  that  one  should  always  think  himself  part  and
parcel of the Supreme Lord and therefore think that he has no right to enjoy
the  results  of  his  work.  Since  he  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  the
results  of  his  work  must  be  enjoyed  by  the  Supreme  Lord.  This  is  actually
Kåñëa  consciousness.  The  person  acting  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  really  a
sannyäsé,  one  in  the  renounced  order  of  life.  By  such  a  mentality,  one  is
satisfied because he is actually acting for the Supreme. Thus he is not attached
to  anything  material;  he  becomes  accustomed  to  not  taking  pleasure  in
anything beyond the transcendental happiness derived from the service of the
Lord. A sannyäsé is supposed to be free from the reactions of his past activities,

but  a  person  who  is  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  automatically  attains  this
perfection  without  even  accepting  the  so-called  order  of  renunciation.  This
state  of  mind  is  called  yogärüòha,  or  the  perfectional  stage  of  yoga.  As
confirmed in the Third Chapter, yas tv ätma-ratir eva syät: one who is satisfied
in himself has no fear of any kind of reaction from his activity.

TEXT  50

iSaiÖ& Pa[aáae YaQaa b]ø TaQaaPanaeiTa iNabaeDa Mae )

SaMaaSaeNaEv k-aENTaeYa iNaïa jaNaSYa Yaa Para )) 50 ))

siddhià präpto yathä brahma
tathäpnoti nibodha me
samäsenaiva kaunteya
niñöhä jïänasya yä parä

SYNONYMS

siddhim—perfection; präptaù—achieving; yathä—as; brahma—the Supreme;
tathä—so; äpnoti—one achieves; nibodha—try to understand; me—from Me;
samäsena—summarily; eva—certainly; kaunteya—O son of Kunté; niñöhä—the
stage; jïänasya—of knowledge; yä—which; parä—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kunté, learn from Me how one who has achieved this perfection

can attain to the supreme perfectional stage, Brahman, the stage of highest
knowledge, by acting in the way I shall now summarize.

PURPORT

The  Lord  describes  for  Arjuna  how  one  can  achieve  the  highest
perfectional  stage  simply  by  being  engaged  in  his  occupational  duty,
performing that duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One attains the

supreme stage of Brahman simply by renouncing the result of his work for the
satisfaction  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  That  is  the  process  of  self-realization.  The
actual perfection of knowledge is in attaining pure Kåñëa consciousness; that is
described in the following verses.

TEXTS

 51–53

buÖya ivéuÖYaa Yau¢-ae Da*TYaaTMaaNa& iNaYaMYa c )

XaBdadqiNvzYaa&STYa¤-a raGaÜezaE VYaudSYa c )) 51 ))

iviv¢-Saevq l/gvaXaq YaTava¡-aYaMaaNaSa" )

DYaaNaYaaeGaParae iNaTYa& vEraGYa& SaMauPaaié[Ta" )) 52 ))

Ahªar& bl&/ dPa| k-aMa& §-aeDa& PairGa]hMa( )

ivMauCYa iNaMaRMa" XaaNTaae b]ø>aUYaaYa k-LPaTae )) 53 ))

buddhyä viçuddhayä yukto
dhåtyätmänaà niyamya ca
çabdädén viñayäàs tyaktvä
räga-dveñau vyudasya ca

vivikta-sevé laghv-äçé
yata-väk-käya-mänasaù
dhyäna-yoga-paro nityaà
vairägyaà samupäçritaù

ahaìkäraà balaà darpaà
kämaà krodhaà parigraham
vimucya nirmamaù çänto
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate

SYNONYMS

buddhyä—with the intelligence; viçuddhayä—fully purified; yuktaù—engaged;
dhåtyä—by determination; ätmänam—the self; niyamya—regulating; ca—also;
çabda-ädén—such as sound; viñayän—the sense objects; tyaktvä—giving up;

räga—attachment; dveñau—and hatred; vyudasya—laying aside; ca—also;
vivikta-sevé—living in a secluded place; laghu-äçé—eating a small quantity;
yata—having controlled; väk—speech; käya—body; mänasaù—and mind;
dhyäna-yoga-paraù—absorbed in trance; nityam—twenty-four hours a day;
vairägyam—detachment; samupäçritaù—having taken shelter of;
ahaìkäram—false ego; balam—false strength; darpam—false pride;
kämam—lust; krodham—anger; parigraham—and acceptance of material
things; vimucya—being delivered from; nirmamaù—without a sense of
proprietorship; çäntaù—peaceful; brahma-bhüyäya—for self-realization;
kalpate—is qualified.

TRANSLATION

Being purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with

determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, being freed from
attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place, who eats little, who
controls his body, mind and power of speech, who is always in trance and who
is detached, free from false ego, false strength, false pride, lust, anger, and
acceptance of material things, free from false proprietorship, and
peaceful—such a person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.

PURPORT

When  one  is  purified  by  intelligence,  he  keeps  himself  in  the  mode  of
goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in trance.
He  is  not  attached  to  the  objects  of  sense  gratification,  and  he  is  free  from
attachment  and  hatred  in  his  activities.  Such  a  detached  person  naturally
prefers to live in a secluded place, he does not eat more than what he requires,
and  he  controls  the  activities  of  his  body  and  mind.  He  has  no  false  ego
because  he  does  not  accept  the  body  as  himself.  Nor  has  he  a  desire  to  make
the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things. Because he has
no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. He is satisfied with everything
that  is  offered  to  him  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  and  he  is  never  angry  in  the
absence of sense gratification. Nor does he endeavor to acquire sense objects.

Thus when he is completely free from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all
material things, and that is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage
is  called  the  brahma-bhüta  stage.  When  one  is  free  from  the  material
conception  of  life,  he  becomes  peaceful  and  cannot  be  agitated.  This  is
described in Bhagavad-gétä (2.70):

äpüryamäëam acala-pratiñöhaà
samudram äpaù praviçanti yadvat
tadvat kämä yaà praviçanti sarve
sa çäntim äpnoti na käma-kämé

“A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires—that enter
like  rivers  into  the  ocean,  which  is  ever  being  filled  but  is  always  still—can
alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.”

TEXT  54

b]ø>aUTa" Pa[SaàaTMaa Na XaaeciTa Na k-a¿iTa )

SaMa" SaveRzu >aUTaezu MaÙi¢&- l/>aTae ParaMa( )) 54 ))

brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm

SYNONYMS

brahma-bhütaù—being one with the Absolute; prasanna-ätmä—fully joyful;
na—never; çocati—laments; na—never; käìkñati—desires; samaù—equally
disposed; sarveñu—to all; bhüteñu—living entities; mat-bhaktim—My
devotional service; labhate—gains; paräm—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme

Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have
anything. He is equally disposed toward every living entity. In that state he
attains pure devotional service unto Me.

PURPORT

To the impersonalist, achieving the brahma-bhüta stage, becoming one with
the Absolute, is the last word. But for the personalist, or pure devotee, one has
to  go  still  further,  to  become  engaged  in  pure  devotional  service.  This  means
that  one  who  is  engaged  in  pure  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme  Lord  is
already  in  a  state  of  liberation,  called  brahma-bhüta,  oneness  with  the
Absolute.  Without  being  one  with  the  Supreme,  the  Absolute,  one  cannot
render  service  unto  Him.  In  the  absolute  conception,  there  is  no  difference
between  the  served  and  the  servitor;  yet  the  distinction  is  there,  in  a  higher
spiritual sense.

In  the  material  concept  of  life,  when  one  works  for  sense  gratification,
there  is  misery,  but  in  the  absolute  world,  when  one  is  engaged  in  pure
devotional service, there is no misery. The devotee in Kåñëa consciousness has
nothing for which to lament or desire. Since God is full, a living entity who is
engaged in God’s service, in Kåñëa consciousness, becomes also full in himself.
He is just like a river cleansed of all dirty water. Because a pure devotee has no
thought other than Kåñëa, he is naturally always joyful. He does not lament for
any material loss or aspire for gain, because he is full in the service of the Lord.
He  has  no  desire  for  material  enjoyment, because he knows that every living
entity  is  a  fragmental  part  and  parcel  of  the  Supreme  Lord  and  therefore
eternally a servant. He does not see, in the material world, someone as higher
and someone as lower; higher and lower positions are ephemeral, and a devotee
has  nothing  to  do  with  ephemeral  appearances  or  disappearances.  For  him
stone and gold are of equal value. This is the brahma-bhüta stage, and this stage
is attained very easily by the pure devotee. In that stage of existence, the idea
of  becoming  one  with  the  Supreme  Brahman  and  annihilating  one’s
individuality  becomes  hellish,  the  idea  of  attaining  the  heavenly  kingdom
becomes  phantasmagoria,  and  the  senses  are  like  serpents’  teeth  that  are

broken.  As  there  is  no  fear  of  a  serpent  with  broken  teeth,  there  is  no  fear
from the senses when they are automatically controlled. The world is miserable
for the materially infected person, but for a devotee the entire world is as good
as  Vaikuëöha,  or  the  spiritual  sky.  The  highest  personality  in  this  material
universe is no more significant than an ant for a devotee. Such a stage can be
achieved by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, who preached pure devotional service
in this age.

TEXT  55

>a¢-ya MaaMai>aJaaNaaiTa YaavaNYaêaiSMa TatvTa" )

TaTaae Maa& TatvTaae jaTva ivXaTae TadNaNTarMa( )) 55 ))

bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram

SYNONYMS

bhaktyä—by pure devotional service; mäm—Me; abhijänäti—one can know;
yävän—as much as; yaù ca asmi—as I am; tattvataù—in truth;
tataù—thereafter; mäm—Me; tattvataù—in truth; jïätvä—knowing;
viçate—he enters; tat-anantaram—thereafter.

TRANSLATION

One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.

PURPORT

The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  and  His  plenary  portions

cannot  be  understood  by  mental  speculation  nor  by  the  nondevotees.  If
anyone  wants  to  understand  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  he  has  to
take  to  pure  devotional  service  under  the  guidance  of  a  pure  devotee.
Otherwise,  the  truth  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  will  always  be
hidden.  As  already  stated  in Bhagavad-gétä  (7.25),  nähaà  prakäçaù  sarvasya:
He is not revealed to everyone. No one can understand God simply by erudite
scholarship or mental speculation. Only one who is actually engaged in Kåñëa
consciousness  and  devotional  service  can  understand  what  Kåñëa 
is.
University degrees are not helpful.

One  who  is  fully  conversant  with  the  Kåñëa  science  becomes  eligible  to
enter into the spiritual kingdom, the abode of Kåñëa. Becoming Brahman does
not mean that one loses his identity. Devotional service is there, and as long as
devotional  service  exists,  there  must  be  God,  the  devotee,  and  the  process  of
devotional service. Such knowledge is never vanquished, even after liberation.
Liberation involves getting free from the concept of material life; in spiritual
life  the  same  distinction  is  there,  the  same  individuality  is  there,  but  in  pure
Kåñëa  consciousness.  One  should  not  mistakenly  think  that  the  word  viçate,
“enters into Me,” supports the monist theory that one becomes homogeneous
with  the  impersonal  Brahman.  No.  Viçate  means  that  one  can  enter  into  the
abode of the Supreme Lord in one’s individuality to engage in His association
and render service unto Him. For instance, a green bird enters a green tree not
to become one with the tree but to enjoy the fruits of the tree. impersonalists
generally give the example of a river flowing into the ocean and merging. This
may  be  a  source  of  happiness  for  the  impersonalist,  but  the  personalist  keeps
his personal individuality like an aquatic in the ocean. We find so many living
entities within the ocean, if we go deep. Surface acquaintance with the ocean
is not sufficient; one must have complete knowledge of the aquatics living in
the ocean depths.

Because  of  his  pure  devotional  service,  a  devotee  can  understand  the
transcendental qualities and the opulences of the Supreme Lord in truth. As it
is  stated  in  the  Eleventh  Chapter,  only  by  devotional  service  can  one
understand.  The  same  is  confirmed  here;  one  can  understand  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead by devotional service and enter into His kingdom.

After  attainment  of  the  brahma-bhüta  stage  of  freedom  from  material
conceptions, devotional service begins by one’s hearing about the Lord. When
one  hears  about  the  Supreme  Lord,  automatically  the  brahma-bhüta  stage
develops,  and  material  contamination—greediness  and 
lust  for  sense
enjoyment—disappears.  As  lust  and  desires  disappear  from  the  heart  of  a
devotee,  he  becomes  more  attached  to  the  service  of  the  Lord,  and  by  such
attachment he becomes free from material contamination. In that state of life
he  can  understand 
statement  of
the  Supreme  Lord.  This 
the  process  of  bhakti,  or
Çrémad-Bhägavatam  also.  After 
transcendental  service,  continues.  The  Vedänta-sütra  (4.1.12)  confirms  this:
ä-präyaëät  taträpi  hi  dåñöam.  This  means  that  after  liberation  the  process  of
devotional  service  continues.  In  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  real  devotional
liberation  is  defined  as  the  reinstatement  of  the  living  entity  in  his  own
identity, his own constitutional position. The constitutional position is already
explained:  every  living  entity  is  a  part-and-parcel  fragmental  portion  of  the
Supreme  Lord.  Therefore  his  constitutional  position  is  to  serve.  After
liberation, this service is never stopped. Actual liberation is getting free from
misconceptions of life.

liberation 

the 

is 

TEXT  56

SavRk-MaaR<YaiPa Sada ku-vaR<aae MaÜyPaaé[Ya" )

MaTPa[SaadadvaPanaeiTa XaaìTa& PadMaVYaYaMa( )) 56 ))

sarva-karmäëy api sadä
kurväëo mad-vyapäçrayaù
mat-prasädäd aväpnoti
çäçvataà padam avyayam

SYNONYMS

sarva—all; karmäëi—activities; api—although; sadä—always;
kurväëaù—performing; mat-vyapäçrayaù—under My protection;

mat-prasädät—by My mercy; aväpnoti—one achieves; çäçvatam—the eternal;
padam—abode; avyayam—imperishable.

TRANSLATION

Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My pure devotee, under My

protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.

PURPORT

The  word  mad-vyapäçrayaù  means  under  the  protection  of  the  Supreme
Lord. To be free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts under the
direction  of  the  Supreme  Lord  or  His  representative,  the  spiritual  master.
There is no time limitation for a pure devotee. He is always, twenty-four hours
a  day,  one  hundred  percent  engaged  in  activities  under  the  direction  of  the
Supreme Lord. To  a devotee  who is thus engaged in Kåñëa consciousness the
Lord is very, very kind. In spite of all difficulties, he is eventually placed in the
transcendental abode, or Kåñëaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is
no  doubt  about  it.  In  that  supreme  abode,  there  is  no  change;  everything  is
eternal, imperishable and full of knowledge.

TEXT  57

ceTaSaa SavRk-MaaRi<a MaiYa SaNNYaSYa MaTPar" )

buiÖYaaeGaMauPaaié[TYa MaiÀta" SaTaTa& >av )) 57 ))

cetasä sarva-karmäëi
mayi sannyasya mat-paraù
buddhi-yogam upäçritya
mac-cittaù satataà bhava

SYNONYMS

cetasä—by intelligence; sarva-karmäëi—all kinds of activities; mayi—unto

Me; sannyasya—giving up; mat-paraù—under My protection;
buddhi-yogam—devotional activities; upäçritya—taking shelter of;
mat-cittaù—in consciousness of Me; satatam—twenty-four hours a day;
bhava—just become.

TRANSLATION

In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My protection.

In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.

PURPORT

When one acts in Kåñëa consciousness, he does not act as the master of the
world.  Just  like  a  servant,  one  should  act  fully  under  the  direction  of  the
Supreme Lord. A servant has no individual independence. He acts only on the
order  of  the  master.  A  servant  acting  on  behalf  of  the  supreme  master  is
unaffected by profit and loss. He simply discharges his duty faithfully in terms
of  the  order  of  the  Lord.  Now,  one  may  argue  that  Arjuna  was  acting  under
the personal direction of Kåñëa but when Kåñëa is not present how should one
act?  If  one  acts  according  to  the  direction  of  Kåñëa  in  this  book,  as  well  as
under the guidance of the representative of Kåñëa, then the result will be the
same. The Sanskrit word mat-paraù is very important in this verse. It indicates
that one has no goal in life save and except acting in Kåñëa consciousness just
to  satisfy  Kåñëa.  And  while  working  in  that  way,  one  should  think  of  Kåñëa
only: “I have been appointed to discharge this particular duty by Kåñëa.” While
acting in such a way, one naturally has to think of Kåñëa. This is perfect Kåñëa
consciousness.  One  should,  however,  note  that  after  doing  something
whimsically  he  should  not  offer  the  result  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  That  sort  of
duty  is  not  in  the  devotional  service  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  One  should  act
according to the order of Kåñëa. This is a very important point. That order of
Kåñëa comes through disciplic succession from the bona fide spiritual master.
Therefore the spiritual master’s order should be taken as the prime duty of life.
If one gets a bona fide spiritual master and acts according to his direction, then
one’s perfection of life in Kåñëa consciousness is guaranteed.

TEXT  58

MaiÀta" SavRduGaaRi<a MaTPa[SaadatairZYaiSa )

AQa cetvMahªaraà é[aeZYaiSa ivNax(+YaiSa )) 58 ))

mac-cittaù sarva-durgäëi
mat-prasädät tariñyasi
atha cet tvam ahaìkärän
na çroñyasi vinaìkñyasi

SYNONYMS

mat—of Me; cittaù—being in consciousness; sarva—all;
durgäëi—impediments; mat-prasädät—by My mercy; tariñyasi—you will
overcome; atha—but; cet—if; tvam—you; ahaìkärät—by false ego; na
çroñyasi—do not hear; vinaìkñyasi—you will be lost.

TRANSLATION

If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of

conditioned life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such
consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost.

PURPORT

A person in full Kåñëa consciousness is not unduly anxious about executing
the duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this great freedom
from all anxiety. For one who acts in Kåñëa consciousness, Lord Kåñëa becomes
the  most  intimate  friend.  He  always  looks  after  His  friend’s  comfort,  and  He
gives Himself to His friend, who is so devotedly engaged working twenty-four
hours  a  day  to  please  the  Lord.  Therefore,  no  one  should  be  carried  away  by
the false ego of the bodily concept of life. One should not falsely think himself
independent of the laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under

strict  material  laws.  But  as  soon  as  he  acts  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  he  is
liberated,  free  from  the  material  perplexities.  One  should  note  very  carefully
that  one  who  is  not  active  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  losing  himself  in  the
material  whirlpool,  in  the  ocean  of  birth  and  death.  No  conditioned  soul
actually knows what is to be done and what is not to be done, but a person who
acts  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  is  free  to  act  because  everything  is  prompted  by
Kåñëa from within and confirmed by the spiritual master.

TEXT  59

YadhªarMaaié[TYa Na YaaeTSYa wiTa MaNYaSae )

iMaQYaEz VYavSaaYaSTae Pa[k*-iTaSTva& iNaYaae+YaiTa )) 59 ))

yad ahaìkäram äçritya
na yotsya iti manyase
mithyaiña vyavasäyas te
prakåtis tväà niyokñyati

SYNONYMS

yat—if; ahaìkäram—of false ego; äçritya—taking shelter; na yotsye—I shall
not fight; iti—thus; manyase—you think; mithyä eñaù—this is all false;
vyavasäyaù—determination; te—your; prakåtiù—material nature; tväm—you;
niyokñyati—will engage.

TRANSLATION

If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you will

be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged in warfare.

PURPORT

Arjuna  was  a  military  man,  and  born  of  the  nature  of  the  kñatriya.
Therefore his natural duty was to fight. But due to false ego he was fearing that

by killing his teacher, grandfather and friends he would incur sinful reactions.
Actually  he  was  considering  himself  master  of  his  actions,  as  if  he  were
directing  the  good  and  bad  results  of  such  work.  He  forgot  that  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead was present there, instructing him to fight. That is the
forgetfulness  of  the  conditioned  soul.  The  Supreme  Personality  gives
directions  as  to  what  is  good  and  what  is  bad,  and  one  simply  has  to  act  in
Kåñëa consciousness to attain the perfection of life. No one can ascertain his
destiny as the Supreme Lord can; therefore the best course is to take direction
from  the  Supreme  Lord  and  act.  No  one  should  neglect  the  order  of  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  or  the  order  of  the  spiritual  master,  who  is
the representative of God. One should act unhesitatingly to execute the order
of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead—that  will  keep  one  safe  under  all
circumstances.

TEXT  60

Sv>aavJaeNa k-aENTaeYa iNabÖ" SveNa k-MaR<aa )

k-Tau| NaeC^iSa YaNMaaehaTk-irZYaSYavXaae_iPa TaTa( )) 60 ))

svabhäva-jena kaunteya
nibaddhaù svena karmaëä
kartuà necchasi yan mohät
kariñyasy avaço ’pi tat

SYNONYMS

svabhäva-jena—born of your own nature; kaunteya—O son of Kunté;
nibaddhaù—conditioned; svena—by your own; karmaëä—activities;
kartum—to do; na—not; icchasi—you like; yat—that which; mohät—by
illusion; kariñyasi—you will do; avaçaù—involuntarily; api—even; tat—that.

TRANSLATION

Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction. But,

compelled by the work born of your own nature, you will act all the same, O
son of Kunté.

PURPORT

If  one  refuses  to  act  under  the  direction  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  then  he  is
compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone is under the
spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature and is acting in that
way.  But  anyone  who  voluntarily  engages  himself  under  the  direction  of  the
Supreme Lord becomes glorious.

TEXT  61

wRìr" SavR>aUTaaNaa& ôÕeXae_JauRNa iTaïiTa )

>a]aMaYaNSavR>aUTaaiNa YaN}aaæ!aiNa MaaYaYaa )) 61 ))

éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe ’rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä

SYNONYMS

éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities;
håt-deçe—in the location of the heart; arjuna—O Arjuna; tiñöhati—resides;
bhrämayan—causing to travel; sarva-bhütäni—all living entities; yantra—on a
machine; ärüòhani—being placed; mäyayä—under the spell of material
energy.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is

directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine,
made of the material energy.

PURPORT

Arjuna  was  not  the  supreme  knower,  and  his  decision  to  fight  or  not  to
fight  was  confined  to  his  limited  discretion.  Lord  Kåñëa  instructed  that  the
individual  is  not  all  in  all.  The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  or  He
Himself, Kåñëa, as the localized Supersoul, sits in the heart directing the living
being.  After  changing  bodies,  the  living entity forgets his past deeds, but the
Supersoul, as the knower of the past, present and future, remains the witness
of all his activities. Therefore all the activities of living entities are directed by
this  Supersoul.  The  living  entity  gets  what  he  deserves  and  is  carried  by  the
material body, which is created in the material energy under the direction of
the Supersoul. As soon as a living entity is placed in a particular type of body,
he  has  to  work  under  the  spell  of  that  bodily  situation.  A  person  seated  in  a
high-speed  motorcar  goes  faster  than  one  seated  in  a  slower  car,  though  the
living  entities,  the  drivers,  may  be  the  same.  Similarly,  by  the  order  of  the
Supreme Soul, material nature fashions a particular type of body to a particular
type  of  living  entity  so  that  he  may  work  according  to  his  past  desires.  The
living entity is not independent. One should not think himself independent of
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  The  individual  is  always  under  the
Lord’s control. Therefore one’s duty is to surrender, and that is the injunction
of the next verse.

TEXT

 62

TaMaev Xar<a& GaC^ SavR>aaveNa >aarTa )

TaTPa[SaadaTPara& XaaiNTa& SQaaNa& Pa[aPSYaiSa XaaìTaMa( )) 62 ))

tam eva çaraëaà gaccha
sarva-bhävena bhärata
tat-prasädät paräà çäntià
sthänaà präpsyasi çäçvatam

SYNONYMS

tam—unto Him; eva—certainly; çaraëam gaccha—surrender;
sarva-bhävena—in all respects; bhärata—O son of Bharata; tat-prasädät—by
His grace; paräm—transcendental; çäntim—peace; sthänam—the abode;
präpsyasi—you will get; çäçvatam—eternal.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain

transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.

PURPORT

A living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is situated in everyone’s heart, and that will relieve him from all
kinds  of  miseries  of  this  material  existence.  By  such  surrender,  not  only  will
one be released from all miseries in this life, but at the end he will reach the
Supreme  God.  The  transcendental  world  is  described  in  the  Vedic  literature
(Åg Veda  1.22.20)  as  tad  viñëoù  paramaà  padam.  Since  all  of  creation  is  the
kingdom of God, everything material is actually spiritual, but paramaà padam
specifically  refers  to  the  eternal  abode,  which  is  called  the  spiritual  sky  or
Vaikuëöha.

In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä it is stated, sarvasya cähaà hådi
sanniviñöaù:  the  Lord  is  seated  in  everyone’s  heart.  So  this  recommendation
that  one  should  surrender  unto  the  Supersoul  sitting  within  means  that  one
should surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Kåñëa has
already  been  accepted  by  Arjuna  as  the  Supreme.  He  was  accepted  in  the
Tenth Chapter as paraà brahma paraà dhäma. Arjuna has accepted Kåñëa as
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  the  supreme  abode  of  all  living
entities,  not  only  because  of  his  personal  experience  but  also  because  of  the
evidence of great authorities like Närada, Asita, Devala and Vyäsa.

TEXT  63

wiTa Tae jaNaMaa:YaaTa& Gauùad(GauùTar& MaYaa )

ivMa*XYaETadXaeze<a YaQaeC^iSa TaQaa ku-å )) 63 ))

iti te jïänam äkhyätaà
guhyäd guhyataraà mayä
vimåçyaitad açeñeëa
yathecchasi tathä kuru

SYNONYMS

iti—thus; te—unto you; jïänam—knowledge; äkhyätam—described;
guhyät—than confidential; guhya-taram—still more confidential; mayä—by
Me; vimåçya—deliberating; etat—on this; açeñeëa—fully; yathä—as;
icchasi—you like; tathä—that; kuru—perform.

TRANSLATION

Thus I have explained to you knowledge still more confidential. Deliberate

on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.

PURPORT

The Lord has already explained to Arjuna the knowledge of brahma-bhüta.
One who is in the brahma-bhüta condition is joyful; he never laments, nor does
he desire anything. That is due to confidential knowledge. Kåñëa also discloses
knowledge  of  the  Supersoul.  This  is  also  Brahman  knowledge,  knowledge  of
Brahman, but it is superior.

tathä  kuru—“As  you 

Here  the  words  yathecchasi 

like,  you  may
act”—indicate that God does not interfere with the little independence of the
living entity. In Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord has explained in all respects how one
can  elevate  his  living  condition.  The  best  advice  imparted  to  Arjuna  is  to
surrender unto the Supersoul seated within his heart. By right discrimination,

one should agree to act according to the order of the Supersoul. That will help
one  become  situated  constantly 
in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  the  highest
perfectional  stage  of  human  life.  Arjuna  is  being  directly  ordered  by  the
Personality  of  Godhead  to  fight.  Surrender  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead is in the best interest of the living entities. It is not for the interest of
the  Supreme.  Before surrendering, one is free to deliberate on this subject as
far as the intelligence goes; that is the best way to accept the instruction of the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Such  instruction  comes  also  through  the
spiritual master, the bona fide representative of Kåñëa.

TEXT  64

SavRGauùTaMa& >aUYa" é*<au Mae ParMa& vc" )

wíae_iSa Mae d*!iMaiTa TaTaae v+YaaiMa Tae ihTaMa( )) 64 ))

sarva-guhyatamaà bhüyaù
çåëu me paramaà vacaù
iñöo ’si me dåòham iti
tato vakñyämi te hitam

SYNONYMS

sarva-guhya-tamam—the most confidential of all; bhüyaù—again; çåëu—just
hear; me—from Me; paramam—the supreme; vacaù—instruction; iñöaù
asi—you are dear; me—to Me; dåòham—very; iti—thus; tataù—therefore;
vakñyämi—I am speaking; te—for your; hitam—benefit.

TRANSLATION

Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme
instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me, for it is
for your benefit.

PURPORT

The  Lord  has  given  Arjuna  knowledge  that  is  confidential  (knowledge  of
Brahman)  and  still  more  confidential  (knowledge  of  the  Supersoul  within
everyone’s  heart),  and  now  He  is  giving  the  most  confidential  part  of
knowledge:  just  surrender  unto  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  At  the
end of the Ninth Chapter He has said, man-manäù: “Just always think of Me.”
The same instruction is repeated here to stress the essence of the teachings of
Bhagavad-gétä.  This  essence  is  not  understood  by  a  common  man,  but  by  one
who is actually very dear to Kåñëa, a pure devotee of Kåñëa. This is the most
important  instruction  in  all  Vedic  literature.  What  Kåñëa  is  saying  in  this
connection  is  the  most  essential  part  of  knowledge,  and  it  should  be  carried
out not only by Arjuna but by all living entities.

TEXT  65

MaNMaNaa >av MaÙ¢-ae MaÛaJaq Maa& NaMaSku-å )

MaaMaevEZYaiSa SaTYa& Tae Pa[iTaJaaNae iPa[Yaae_iSa Mae )) 65 ))

man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
mäm evaiñyasi satyaà te
pratijäne priyo ’si me

SYNONYMS

mat-manäù—thinking of Me; bhava—just become; mat-bhaktaù—My devotee;
mat-yäjé—My worshiper; mäm—unto Me; namaskuru—offer your obeisances;
mäm—unto Me; eva—certainly; eñyasi—you will come; satyam—truly; te—to
you; pratijäne—I promise; priyaù—dear; asi—you are; me—to Me.

TRANSLATION

Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your
homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this

because you are My very dear friend.

PURPORT

The most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a pure
devotee  of  Kåñëa  and  always  think  of  Him  and  act  for  Him.  One  should  not
become  an  official  meditator.  Life  should  be  so  molded  that  one  will  always
have the chance to think of Kåñëa. One should always act in such a way that
all his daily activities are in connection with Kåñëa. He should arrange his life
in  such  a  way  that  throughout  the  twenty-four  hours  he  cannot  but  think  of
Kåñëa.  And  the  Lord’s  promise  is  that  anyone  who  is  in  such  pure  Kåñëa
consciousness  will  certainly  return  to  the  abode  of  Kåñëa,  where  he  will  be
engaged in the association of Kåñëa face to face. This most confidential part of
knowledge  is  spoken  to  Arjuna  because  he  is  the  dear  friend  of  Kåñëa.
Everyone who follows the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend to Kåñëa
and obtain the same perfection as Arjuna.

These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Kåñëa—the
very form with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with a beautiful face
and peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptions of Kåñëa found in the
Brahma-saàhitä and other literatures. One should fix his mind on this original
form  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa.  One  should  not  even  divert  his  attention  to  other
forms  of  the  Lord.  The  Lord  has  multiforms  as  Viñëu,  Näräyaëa,  Räma,
Varäha, etc., but a devotee should concentrate his mind on the form that was
present  before  Arjuna.  Concentration  of  the  mind  on  the  form  of  Kåñëa
constitutes  the  most  confidential  part  of  knowledge,  and  this  is  disclosed  to
Arjuna because Arjuna is the most dear friend of Kåñëa’s.

TEXT  66

SavRDaMaaRNPairTYaJYa MaaMaek&- Xar<a& v]Ja )

Ah& Tva& SavRPaaPae>Yaae Maae+aiYaZYaaiMa Maa éuc" )) 66 ))

sarva-dharmän parityajya

mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù

SYNONYMS

sarva-dharmän—all varieties of religion; parityajya—abandoning; mäm—unto
Me; ekam—only; çaraëam—for surrender; vraja—go; aham—I; tväm—you;
sarva—all; päpebhyaù—from sinful reactions; mokñayiñyämi—will deliver;
mä—do not; çucaù—worry.

TRANSLATION

Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver

you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear.

PURPORT

The  Lord  has  described  various  kinds  of  knowledge  and  processes  of
religion—knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Brahman,  knowledge  of  the  Supersoul,
knowledge of the different types of orders and statuses of social life, knowledge
of the renounced order of life, knowledge of nonattachment, sense and mind
control,  meditation,  etc.  He  has  described in so many ways different types of
religion. Now, in summarizing Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord says that Arjuna should
give  up  all  the  processes  that  have  been  explained  to  him;  he  should  simply
surrender  to  Kåñëa.  That  surrender  will  save  him  from  all  kinds  of  sinful
reactions, for the Lord personally promises to protect him.

In the Seventh Chapter it was said that only one who has become free from
all sinful reactions can take to the worship of Lord Kåñëa. Thus one may think
that  unless  he  is  free  from  all  sinful  reactions  he  cannot  take  to  the
surrendering process. To such doubts it is here said that even if one is not free
from all sinful reactions, simply by the process of surrendering to Çré Kåñëa he
is automatically freed. There is no need of strenuous effort to free oneself from
sinful reactions. One should unhesitatingly accept Kåñëa as the supreme savior

of all living entities. With faith and love, one should surrender unto Him.

The  process  of  surrender  to  Kåñëa  is  described  in  the Hari-bhakti-viläsa

(11.676):

änukülyasya saìkalpaù
prätikülyasya varjanam
rakñiñyatéti viçväso
goptåtve varanaà tathä
ätma-nikñepa-kärpaëye
ñaò-vidhä çaraëägatiù

According  to  the  devotional  process,  one  should  simply  accept  such
religious  principles  that  will  lead  ultimately  to  the  devotional  service  of  the
Lord.  One  may  perform  a  particular  occupational  duty  according  to  his
position in the social order, but if by executing his duty one does not come to
the point of Kåñëa consciousness, all his activities are in vain. Anything that
does  not  lead  to  the  perfectional  stage  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  should  be
avoided. One should be confident that in all circumstances Kåñëa will protect
him from all difficulties. There is no need of thinking how one should keep the
body and soul together. Kåñëa will see to that. One should always think himself
helpless  and  should  consider  Kåñëa  the  only  basis  for  his  progress  in  life.  As
soon as one seriously engages himself in devotional service to the Lord in full
Kåñëa  consciousness,  at  once  he  becomes  freed  from  all  contamination  of
material  nature.  There  are  different  processes  of  religion  and  purificatory
processes  by  cultivation  of  knowledge,  meditation  in  the  mystic  yoga  system,
etc.,  but  one  who  surrenders  unto  Kåñëa  does  not  have  to  execute  so  many
methods. That simple surrender unto Kåñëa will save him from unnecessarily
wasting  time.  One  can  thus  make  all  progress  at  once  and  be  freed  from  all
sinful reactions.

One should be attracted by the beautiful vision of Kåñëa. His name is Kåñëa
because  He  is  all-attractive.  One  who  becomes  attracted  by  the  beautiful,
all-powerful,  omnipotent  vision  of  Kåñëa  is  fortunate.  There  are  different
kinds  of  transcendentalists—some  of  them  are  attached  to  the  impersonal
Brahman vision, some of them are attracted by the Supersoul feature, etc., but

one  who  is  attracted  to  the  personal  feature  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  and,  above  all,  one  who  is  attracted  by  the  Supreme Personality of
Godhead  as  Kåñëa  Himself,  is  the  most  perfect  transcendentalist.  In  other
words,  devotional  service  to  Kåñëa,  in  full  consciousness,  is  the  most
confidential  part  of  knowledge,  and  this  is  the  essence  of  the  whole
Bhagavad-gétä. Karma-yogés, empiric philosophers, mystics and devotees are all
called transcendentalists, but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all. The
particular words used here, mä çucaù, “Don’t fear, don’t hesitate, don’t worry,”
are very significant. One may be perplexed as to how one can give up all kinds
of religious forms and simply surrender unto Kåñëa, but such worry is useless.

TEXT  67

wd& Tae NaaTaPaSk-aYa Naa>a¢-aYa k-dacNa )

Na caéué[Uzve vaCYa& Na c Maa& Yaae_>YaSaUYaiTa )) 67 ))

idaà te nätapaskäya
näbhaktäya kadäcana
na cäçuçrüñave väcyaà
na ca mäà yo ’bhyasüyati

SYNONYMS

idam—this; te—by you; na—never; atapaskäya—to one who is not austere;
na—never; abhaktäya—to one who is not a devotee; kadäcana—at any time;
na—never; ca—also; açuçrüñave—to one who is not engaged in devotional
service; väcyam—to be spoken; na—never; ca—also; mäm—toward Me;
yaù—anyone who; abhyasüyati—is envious.

TRANSLATION

This confidential knowledge may never be explained to those who are not
austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one who is envious
of Me.

PURPORT

Persons  who  have  not  undergone  the  austerities  of  the  religious  process,
who  have  never  attempted  devotional  service  in  Kåñëa  consciousness,  who
have  not  tended  a  pure  devotee,  and  especially  those  who  are  conscious  of
Kåñëa  only  as  a  historical  personality  or  who  are  envious  of  the  greatness  of
Kåñëa  should  not  be  told  this  most  confidential  part  of  knowledge.  It  is,
however,  sometimes  found  that  even  demoniac  persons  who  are  envious  of
Kåñëa,  worshiping  Kåñëa  in  a  different  way,  take  to  the  profession  of
explaining Bhagavad-gétä in a different way to make business, but anyone who
desires  actually  to  understand  Kåñëa  must  avoid  such  commentaries  on
Bhagavad-gétä. Actually the purpose of Bhagavad-gétä is not understandable to
those who are sensuous. Even if one is not sensuous but is strictly following the
disciplines  enjoined  in  the  Vedic  scripture,  if  he  is  not  a  devotee  he  also
cannot  understand  Kåñëa.  And  even  when  one  poses  himself  as  a  devotee  of
Kåñëa  but  is  not  engaged  in  Kåñëa  conscious  activities,  he  also  cannot
understand  Kåñëa.  There  are  many  persons  who  envy  Kåñëa  because  He  has
explained in Bhagavad-gétä that He is the Supreme and that nothing is above
Him or equal to Him. There are many persons who are envious of Kåñëa. Such
persons  should  not  be  told  of  Bhagavad-gétä,  for  they  cannot  understand.
There  is  no  possibility  of  faithless  persons’  understanding  Bhagavad-gétä  and
Kåñëa.  Without  understanding  Kåñëa  from  the  authority  of  a  pure  devotee,
one should not try to comment upon Bhagavad-gétä.

TEXT  68

Ya wd& ParMa& Gauù& MaÙ¢e-Zvi>aDaaSYaiTa )

>ai¢&- MaiYa Para& k*-Tva MaaMaevEZYaTYaSa&XaYa" )) 68 ))

ya idaà paramaà guhyaà
mad-bhakteñv abhidhäsyati
bhaktià mayi paräà kåtvä

mäm evaiñyaty asaàçayaù

SYNONYMS

yaù—anyone who; idam—this; paramam—most; guhyam—confidential secret;
mat—of Mine; bhakteñu—amongst devotees; abhidhäsyati—explains;
bhaktim—devotional service; mayi—unto Me; paräm—transcendental;
kåtvä—doing; mäm—unto Me; eva—certainly; eñyati—comes;
asaàçayaù—without doubt.

TRANSLATION

For one who explains this supreme secret to the devotees, pure devotional

service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.

PURPORT

Generally  it  is  advised  that  Bhagavad-gétä  be  discussed  amongst  the
devotees  only,  for  those  who  are  not  devotees  will  understand  neither  Kåñëa
nor Bhagavad-gétä. Those who do not accept Kåñëa as He is and Bhagavad-gétä
as  it  is  should  not  try  to  explain  Bhagavad-gétä  whimsically  and  become
offenders.  Bhagavad-gétä  should  be  explained  to  persons  who  are  ready  to
accept Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is a subject matter for
the  devotees  only  and  not  for  philosophical  speculators.  Anyone,  however,
who tries sincerely to present Bhagavad-gétä as it is will advance in devotional
activities and reach the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such pure
devotion, he is sure to go back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT  69

Na c TaSMaaNMaNauZYaezu k-iêNMae iPa[Yak*-taMa" )

>aivTaa Na c Mae TaSMaadNYa" iPa[YaTarae >auiv )) 69 ))

na ca tasmän manuñyeñu

kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù
bhavitä na ca me tasmäd
anyaù priyataro bhuvi

SYNONYMS

na—never; ca—and; tasmät—than him; manuñyeñu—among men;
kaçcit—anyone; me—to Me; priya-kåt-tamaù—more dear; bhavitä—will
become; na—nor; ca—and; me—to Me; tasmät—than him; anyaù—another;
priya-taraù—dearer; bhuvi—in this world.

TRANSLATION

There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there

ever be one more dear.

TEXT  70

ADYaeZYaTae c Ya wMa& DaMYa| Sa&vadMaavYaae" )

jaNaYajeNa TaeNaahiMaí" SYaaiMaiTa Mae MaiTa" )) 70 ))

adhyeñyate ca ya imaà
dharmyaà saàvädam ävayoù
jïäna-yajïena tenäham
iñöaù syäm iti me matiù

SYNONYMS

adhyeñyate—will study; ca—also; yaù—he who; imam—this;
dharmyam—sacred; saàvädam—conversation; ävayoù—of ours; jïäna—of
knowledge; yajïena—by the sacrifice; tena—by him; aham—I;
iñöaù—worshiped; syäm—shall be; iti—thus; me—My; matiù—opinion.

TRANSLATION

And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation of ours worships

Me by his intelligence.

TEXT  71

é[ÖavaNaNaSaUYaê é*<auYaadiPa Yaae Nar" )

Saae_iPa Mau¢-" éu>aamçaek-aNPa[aPanuYaaTPau<Yak-MaR<aaMa( )) 71 ))

çraddhävän anasüyaç ca
çåëuyäd api yo naraù
so ’pi muktaù çubhäl lokän
präpnuyät puëya-karmaëäm

SYNONYMS

çraddhä-vän—faithful; anasüyaù—not envious; ca—and; çåëuyät—does hear;
api—certainly; yaù—who; naraù—a man; saù—he; api—also; muktaù—being
liberated; çubhän—the auspicious; lokän—planets; präpnuyät—he attains;
puëya-karmaëäm—of the pious.

TRANSLATION

And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful

reactions and attains to the auspicious planets where the pious dwell.

PURPORT

In  the  sixty-seventh  verse  of  this  chapter,  the  Lord  explicitly  forbade  the
Gétä’s  being  spoken  to  those  who  are  envious  of  the  Lord.  In  other  words,
Bhagavad-gétä  is  for  the  devotees  only.  But  it  so  happens  that  sometimes  a
devotee of the Lord will hold open class, and in that class not all the students
are  expected  to  be  devotees.  Why  do  such  persons  hold  open  class?  It  is
explained  here  that  although  not  everyone  is  a  devotee,  still  there  are  many
men  who  are  not  envious  of  Kåñëa.  They  have  faith  in  Him  as  the  Supreme

Personality of Godhead. If such persons hear from a bona fide devotee about
the Lord, the result is that they become at once free from all sinful reactions
and  after  that  attain  to  the  planetary  system  where  all  righteous  persons  are
situated.  Therefore  simply  by  hearing  Bhagavad-gétä,  even  a  person  who  does
not  try  to  be  a  pure  devotee  attains  the  result  of  righteous  activities.  Thus  a
pure  devotee  of  the  Lord  gives  everyone  a  chance  to  become  free  from  all
sinful reactions and to become a devotee of the Lord.

Generally those who are free from sinful reactions, those who are righteous,
very  easily  take  to  Kåñëa  consciousness.  The  word  puëya-karmaëäm  is  very
significant  here.  This  refers  to  the  performance  of  great  sacrifices,  like  the
açvamedha-yajïa, mentioned in the Vedic literature. Those who are righteous
in performing devotional service but who are not pure can attain the planetary
system of the polestar, or Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva Mahäräja is presiding. He
is a great devotee of the Lord, and he has a special planet, which is called the
polestar.

TEXT  72

k-iÀdeTaC^]uTa& PaaQaR TvYaEk-aGa]e<a ceTaSaa )

k-iÀdjaNaSaMMaaeh" Pa[<aíSTae DaNaÅYa )) 72 ))

kaccid etac chrutaà pärtha
tvayaikägreëa cetasä
kaccid ajïäna-sammohaù
praëañöas te dhanaïjaya

SYNONYMS

kaccit—whether; etat—this; çrutam—heard; pärtha—O son of Påthä;
tvayä—by you; eka-agreëa—with full attention; cetasä—by the mind;
kaccit—whether; ajïäna—of ignorance; sammohaù—the illusion;
praëañöaù—dispelled; te—of you; dhanaïjaya—O conqueror of wealth
(Arjuna).

TRANSLATION

O son of Påthä, O conqueror of wealth, have you heard this with an

attentive mind? And are your ignorance and illusions now dispelled?

PURPORT

The Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was His
duty to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the whole Bhagavad-gétä
in its proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready to re-explain any point, or
the  whole  Bhagavad-gétä  if  so  required.  Actually,  anyone  who  hears
Bhagavad-gétä  from  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master 
like  Kåñëa  or  His
representative will find that all his ignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gétä is not
an  ordinary  book  written  by  a  poet  or  fiction  writer;  it  is  spoken  by  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Any person fortunate enough to hear these
teachings from Kåñëa or from His bona fide spiritual representative is sure to
become a liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.

TEXT  73

AJauRNa ovac )

Naíae Maaeh" SMa*iTalR/BDaa TvTPa[SaadaNMaYaaCYauTa )

iSQaTaae_iSMa GaTaSaNdeh" k-irZYae vcNa& Tav )) 73 ))

arjuna uväca
nañöo mohaù småtir labdhä
tvat-prasädän mayäcyuta
sthito ’smi gata-sandehaù
kariñye vacanaà tava

SYNONYMS

arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; nañöaù—dispelled; mohaù—illusion;

småtiù—memory; labdhä—regained; tvat-prasädät—by Your mercy; mayä—by
me; acyuta—O infallible Kåñëa; sthitaù—situated; asmi—I am; gata—removed;
sandehaù—all doubts; kariñye—I shall execute; vacanam—order; tava—Your.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: My dear Kåñëa, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone. I
have regained my memory by Your mercy. I am now firm and free from doubt
and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.

PURPORT

The constitutional position of a living entity, represented by Arjuna, is that
he  has  to  act  according  to  the  order  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  He  is  meant  for
self-discipline.  Çré  Caitanya  Mahäprabhu  says  that  the  actual  position  of  the
living  entity  is  that  of  eternal  servant  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Forgetting  this
principle,  the  living  entity  becomes  conditioned  by  material  nature,  but  in
serving the Supreme Lord he becomes the liberated servant of God. The living
entity’s  constitutional  position  is  to  be  a  servitor;  he  has  to  serve  either  the
illusory mäyä or the Supreme Lord. If he serves the Supreme Lord he is in his
normal condition, but if he prefers to serve the illusory, external energy, then
certainly he will be in bondage. In illusion the living entity is serving in this
material world. He is bound by his lust and desires, yet he thinks of himself as
the master of the world. This is called illusion. When a person is liberated, his
illusion  is  over,  and  he  voluntarily  surrenders  unto  the  Supreme  to  act
according  to  His  desires.  The  last  illusion,  the  last  snare  of  mäyä  to  trap  the
living entity, is the proposition that he is God. The living entity thinks that he
is  no  longer  a  conditioned  soul,  but  God.  He  is  so  unintelligent  that  he  does
not think that if he were God, then how could he be in doubt? That he does
not consider. So that is the last snare of illusion. Actually to become free from
the  illusory  energy  is  to  understand  Kåñëa,  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, and agree to act according to His order.

The word moha is very important in this verse. Moha refers to that which is
opposed  to  knowledge.  Actually  real  knowledge  is  the  understanding  that

every  living  being  is  eternally  a  servitor  of  the  Lord,  but  instead  of  thinking
oneself in that position, the living entity thinks that he is not a servant, that
he is the master of this material world, for he wants to lord it over the material
nature. That is his illusion. This illusion can be overcome by the mercy of the
Lord or by the mercy of a pure devotee. When that illusion is over, one agrees
to act in Kåñëa consciousness.

Kåñëa  consciousness  is  acting  according  to  Kåñëa’s  order.  A  conditioned
soul,  illusioned  by  the  external  energy  of  matter,  does  not  know  that  the
Supreme Lord is the master who is full of knowledge and who is the proprietor
of  everything.  Whatever  He  desires  He  can  bestow  upon  His  devotees;  He  is
the friend of everyone, and He is especially inclined to His devotee. He is the
controller  of  this  material  nature  and  of  all  living  entities.  He  is  also  the
controller  of  inexhaustible  time,  and  He  is  full  of  all  opulences  and  all
potencies. The Supreme Personality of Godhead can even give Himself to the
devotee.  One  who  does  not  know  Him  is  under  the  spell  of  illusion;  he  does
not become a devotee, but a servitor of mäyä. Arjuna, however, after hearing
Bhagavad-gétä from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, became free from all
illusion.  He  could  understand  that  Kåñëa  was  not  only  his  friend  but  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  And  he  understood  Kåñëa  factually.  So  to
study Bhagavad-gétä is to understand Kåñëa factually. When a person is in full
knowledge, he naturally surrenders to Kåñëa. When Arjuna understood that it
was Kåñëa’s plan to reduce the unnecessary increase of population, he agreed
to fight according to Kåñëa’s desire. He again took up his weapons—his arrows
and bow—to fight under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT  74

SaÅYa ovac )

wTYah& vaSaudevSYa PaaQaRSYa c MahaTMaNa" )

Sa&vadiMaMaMaé[aEzMad(>auTa& raeMahzR<aMa( )) 74 ))

saïjaya uväca
ity ahaà väsudevasya

pärthasya ca mahätmanaù
saàvädam imam açrauñam
adbhutaà roma-harñaëam

SYNONYMS

saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; iti—thus; aham—I; väsudevasya—of Kåñëa;
pärthasya—and Arjuna; ca—also; mahä-ätmanaù—of the great soul;
saàvädam—discussion; imam—this; açrauñam—have heard;
adbhutam—wonderful; roma-harñaëam—making the hair stand on end.

TRANSLATION

Saïjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls, Kåñëa
and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is standing on end.

PURPORT

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gétä, Dhåtaräñöra inquired from his secretary
Saïjaya, “What happened on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra?” The entire study
was related to the heart of Saïjaya by the grace of his spiritual master, Vyäsa.
He  thus  explained  the  theme  of  the  battlefield.  The  conversation  was
wonderful  because  such  an  important  conversation  between  two  great  souls
had never taken place before and would not take place again. It was wonderful
because the Supreme Personality of Godhead was speaking about Himself and
His  energies  to  the  living  entity,  Arjuna,  a  great  devotee  of  the  Lord.  If  we
follow  in  the  footsteps  of  Arjuna  to  understand  Kåñëa,  then  our  life  will  be
happy and successful. Saïjaya realized this, and as he began to understand it,
he related the conversation to Dhåtaräñöra. Now it is concluded that wherever
there is Kåñëa and Arjuna, there is victory.

TEXT  75

VYaaSaPa[SaadaC^]uTavaNaeTad(GauùMah& ParMa( )

YaaeGa& YaaeGaeìraTk*-Z<aaTSaa+aaTk-QaYaTa" SvYaMa( )) 75 ))

vyäsa-prasädäc chrutavän
etad guhyam ahaà param
yogaà yogeçvarät kåñëät
säkñät kathayataù svayam

SYNONYMS

vyäsa-prasädät—by the mercy of Vyäsadeva; çrutavän—have heard; etat—this;
guhyam—confidential; aham—I; param—the supreme; yogam—mysticism;
yoga-éçvarät—from the master of all mysticism; kåñëät—from Kåñëa;
säkñät—directly; kathayataù—speaking; svayam—personally.

TRANSLATION

By the mercy of Vyäsa, I have heard these most confidential talks directly

from the master of all mysticism, Kåñëa, who was speaking personally to
Arjuna.

PURPORT

Vyäsa was the spiritual master of Saïjaya, and Saïjaya admits that it was by
Vyäsa’s mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
This  means  that  one  has  to  understand  Kåñëa  not  directly  but  through  the
medium  of  the  spiritual  master.  The  spiritual  master  is  the  transparent
medium,  although  it  is  true  that  the  experience  is  still  direct.  This  is  the
mystery  of  the  disciplic  succession.  When  the  spiritual  master  is  bona  fide,
then one can hear Bhagavad-gétä directly, as Arjuna heard it. There are many
mystics and yogés all over the world, but Kåñëa is the master of all yoga systems.
Kåñëa’s  instruction  is  explicitly  stated  in  Bhagavad-gétä—surrender  unto
Kåñëa. One who does so is the topmost yogé. This is confirmed in the last verse
of the Sixth Chapter. Yoginäm api sarveñäm.

Närada  is  the  direct  disciple  of  Kåñëa  and  the  spiritual  master  of  Vyäsa.

Therefore  Vyäsa  is  as  bona  fide  as  Arjuna  because  he  comes  in  the  disciplic
succession, and Saïjaya is the direct disciple of Vyäsa. Therefore by the grace
of  Vyäsa,  Saïjaya’s  senses  were  purified,  and  he  could  see  and  hear  Kåñëa
directly.  One  who  directly  hears  Kåñëa  can  understand  this  confidential
knowledge.  If  one  does  not  come  to  the  disciplic  succession,  he  cannot  hear
Kåñëa;  therefore  his  knowledge  is  always  imperfect,  at  least  as  far  as
understanding Bhagavad-gétä is concerned.

In  Bhagavad-gétä,  all  the  yoga  systems—karma-yoga, 

jïäna-yoga  and
bhakti-yoga—are explained. Kåñëa is the master of all such mysticism. It is to
be  understood,  however,  that  as  Arjuna  was  fortunate  enough  to  understand
Kåñëa directly, so, by the grace of Vyäsa, Saïjaya was also able to hear Kåñëa
directly. Actually there is no difference between hearing directly from Kåñëa
and  hearing  directly  from  Kåñëa  via  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master  like  Vyäsa.
The  spiritual  master  is  the  representative  of  Vyäsadeva  also.  Therefore,
according  to  the  Vedic  system,  on  the  birthday  of  the  spiritual  master  the
disciples conduct the ceremony called Vyäsa-püjä.

TEXT  76

raJaNSa&SMa*TYa Sa&SMa*TYa Sa&vadiMaMaMad(>auTaMa( )

ke-XavaJauRNaYaae" Pau<Ya& ôZYaaiMa c MauhuMauRhu" )) 76 ))

räjan saàsmåtya saàsmåtya
saàvädam imam adbhutam
keçavärjunayoù puëyaà
håñyämi ca muhur muhuù

SYNONYMS

räjan—O King; saàsmåtya—remembering; saàsmåtya—remembering;
saàvädam—message; imam—this; adbhutam—wonderful; keçava—of Lord
Kåñëa; arjunayoù—and Arjuna; puëyam—pious; håñyämi—I am taking
pleasure; ca—also; muhuù muhuù—repeatedly.

TRANSLATION

O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between

Kåñëa and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.

PURPORT

The understanding of Bhagavad-gétä is so transcendental that anyone who
becomes  conversant  with  the  topics  of  Arjuna  and  Kåñëa  becomes  righteous
and he cannot forget such talks. This is the transcendental position of spiritual
life.  In  other  words,  one  who  hears  the  Gétä  from  the  right  source,  directly
from  Kåñëa,  attains  full  Kåñëa  consciousness.  The  result  of  Kåñëa
consciousness is that one becomes increasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life
with a thrill, not only for some time, but at every moment.

TEXT  77

TaÀ Sa&SMa*TYa Sa&SMa*TYa æPaMaTYad(>auTa& hre" )

ivSMaYaae Mae MahaNraJaNôZYaaiMa c PauNa" PauNa" )) 77 ))

tac ca saàsmåtya saàsmåtya
rüpam aty-adbhutaà hareù
vismayo me mahän räjan
håñyämi ca punaù punaù

SYNONYMS

tat—that; ca—also; saàsmåtya—remembering; saàsmåtya—remembering;
rüpam—form; ati—greatly; adbhutam—wonderful; hareù—of Lord Kåñëa;
vismayaù—wonder; me—my; mahän—great; räjan—O King; håñyämi—I am
enjoying; ca—also; punaù punaù—repeatedly.

TRANSLATION

O King, as I remember the wonderful form of Lord Kåñëa, I am struck with

wonder more and more, and I rejoice again and again.

PURPORT

It appears that Saïjaya also, by the grace of Vyäsa, could see the universal
form  Kåñëa  exhibited  to  Arjuna.  It  is,  of  course,  said  that  Lord  Kåñëa  had
never exhibited such a form before. It was exhibited to Arjuna only, yet some
great devotees could also see the universal form of Kåñëa when it was shown to
Arjuna,  and  Vyäsa  was  one  of  them.  He  is  one  of  the  great  devotees  of  the
Lord,  and  he  is  considered  to  be  a  powerful  incarnation  of  Kåñëa.  Vyäsa
disclosed this to his disciple Saïjaya, who remembered that wonderful form of
Kåñëa exhibited to Arjuna and enjoyed it repeatedly.

TEXT  78

a}a YaaeGaeìr" k*-Z<aae Ya}a PaaQaaeR DaNauDaRr" )

Ta}a é[qivRJaYaae >aUiTaDa]uRva NaqiTaMaRiTaMaRMa )) 78 ))

yatra yogeçvaraù kåñëo
yatra pärtho dhanur-dharaù
tatra çrér vijayo bhütir
dhruvä nétir matir mama

SYNONYMS

yatra—where; yoga-éçvaraù—the master of mysticism; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
yatra—where; pärthaù—the son of Påthä; dhanuù-dharaù—the carrier of the
bow and arrow; tatra—there; çréù—opulence; vijayaù—victory;
bhütiù—exceptional power; dhruvä—certain; nétiù—morality; matiù
mama—my opinion.

TRANSLATION

Wherever there is Kåñëa, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is

Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victory,
extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.

PURPORT

The Bhagavad-gétä began with an inquiry of Dhåtaräñöra’s. He was hopeful
of  the  victory  of  his  sons,  assisted  by  great  warriors  like  Bhéñma,  Droëa  and
Karëa.  He  was  hopeful  that  the  victory  would  be  on  his  side.  But  after
describing  the  scene  on  the  battlefield,  Saïjaya  told  the  King,  “You  are
thinking  of  victory,  but  my  opinion  is  that  where  Kåñëa  and  Arjuna  are
present, there will be all good fortune.” He directly confirmed that Dhåtaräñöra
could not expect victory for his side. Victory was certain for the side of Arjuna
because  Kåñëa  was  there.  Kåñëa’s  acceptance  of  the  post  of  charioteer  for
Arjuna  was  an  exhibition  of  another  opulence.  Kåñëa  is  full  of  all  opulences,
and  renunciation  is  one  of  them.  There  are  many  instances  of  such
renunciation, for Kåñëa is also the master of renunciation.

The  fight  was  actually  between  Duryodhana  and  Yudhiñöhira.  Arjuna  was
fighting on behalf of his elder brother, Yudhiñöhira. Because Kåñëa and Arjuna
were on the side of Yudhiñöhira, Yudhiñöhira’s victory was certain. The battle
was to decide who would rule the world, and Saïjaya predicted that the power
would be transferred to Yudhiñöhira. It is also predicted here that Yudhiñöhira,
after gaining victory in this battle, would flourish more and more because not
only  was  he  righteous  and  pious  but  he  was  also  a  strict  moralist.  He  never
spoke a lie during his life.

There  are  many  less  intelligent  persons  who  take  Bhagavad-gétä  to  be  a
discussion  of  topics  between  two  friends  on  a  battlefield.  But  such  a  book
cannot  be  scripture.  Some  may  protest  that  Kåñëa  incited  Arjuna  to  fight,
which  is  immoral,  but  the  reality  of  the  situation  is  clearly  stated:
Bhagavad-gétä is the supreme instruction in morality. The supreme instruction
of  morality  is  stated  in  the  Ninth  Chapter,  in  the  thirty-fourth  verse:
man-manä bhava mad-bhaktaù. One must become a devotee of Kåñëa, and the
essence  of  all  religion  is  to  surrender  unto  Kåñëa  (sarva-dharmän  parityajya

mäm  ekaà  çaraëaà  vraja).  The  instructions  of  Bhagavad-gétä  constitute  the
supreme  process  of  religion  and  of  morality.  All  other  processes  may  be
purifying  and  may  lead  to  this  process,  but  the  last  instruction  of  the  Gétä  is
the  last  word  in  all  morality  and  religion:  surrender  unto  Kåñëa.  This  is  the
verdict of the Eighteenth Chapter.

From  Bhagavad-gétä  we  can  understand  that  to  realize  oneself  by
philosophical  speculation  and  by  meditation  is  one  process,  but  to  fully
surrender  unto  Kåñëa  is  the  highest  perfection.  This  is  the  essence  of  the
teachings of Bhagavad-gétä. The path of regulative principles according to the
orders of social life and according to the different courses of religion may be a
confidential  path  of  knowledge.  But  although  the  rituals  of  religion  are
confidential,  meditation  and  cultivation  of  knowledge  are  still  more
confidential.  And  surrender  unto  Kåñëa  in  devotional  service  in  full  Kåñëa
consciousness  is  the  most  confidential  instruction.  That  is  the  essence  of  the
Eighteenth Chapter.

Another  feature  of  Bhagavad-gétä  is  that  the  actual  truth  is  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa.  The  Absolute  Truth  is  realized  in  three
features—impersonal  Brahman,  localized  Paramätmä,  and  ultimately  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa.  Perfect  knowledge  of  the  Absolute
Truth  means  perfect  knowledge  of  Kåñëa.  If  one  understands  Kåñëa,  then  all
the  departments  of  knowledge  are  part  and  parcel  of  that  understanding.
Kåñëa  is  transcendental,  for  He  is  always  situated  in  His  eternal  internal
potency. The living entities are manifested of His energy and are divided into
two classes, eternally conditioned and eternally liberated. Such living entities
are  innumerable,  and  they  are  considered  fundamental  parts  of  Kåñëa.
Material  energy  is  manifested  into  twenty-four  divisions.  The  creation  is
effected  by  eternal  time,  and  it  is  created  and  dissolved  by  external  energy.
This  manifestation  of  the  cosmic  world  repeatedly  becomes  visible  and
invisible.

In  Bhagavad-gétä  five  principal  subject  matters  have  been  discussed:  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  material  nature,  the  living  entities,  eternal
time and all kinds of activities. All is dependent on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead,  Kåñëa.  All  conceptions  of  the  Absolute  Truth—impersonal

any 

and 

other 

localized 

Paramätmä 

transcendental
Brahman, 
conception—exist  within  the  category  of  understanding  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  Although  superficially  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead,  the  living  entity,  material  nature  and  time  appear  to  be  different,
nothing  is  different  from  the  Supreme.  But  the  Supreme  is  always  different
from everything. Lord Caitanya’s philosophy is that of “inconceivable oneness
and  difference.”  This  system  of  philosophy  constitutes  perfect  knowledge  of
the Absolute Truth.

The  living  entity  in  his  original  position  is  pure  spirit.  He  is  just  like  an
atomic  particle  of  the  Supreme  Spirit.  Thus  Lord  Kåñëa  may  be  compared  to
the sun, and the living entities to sunshine. Because the living entities are the
marginal  energy  of  Kåñëa,  they  have  a  tendency  to  be  in  contact  either  with
the  material  energy  or  with  the  spiritual  energy.  In  other  words,  the  living
entity is situated between the two energies of the Lord, and because he belongs
to  the  superior  energy  of  the  Lord,  he  has  a  particle  of  independence.  By
proper  use  of  that  independence  he  comes  under  the  direct  order  of  Kåñëa.
Thus he attains his normal condition in the pleasure-giving potency.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighteenth Chapter of the Çrémad
Bhagavad-gétä in the matter of its Conclusion—the Perfection of Renunciation.

Bhagavad-gita As It Is, translated with purports by 
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, 
is available from the publishers via Krishna.com in various formats, 
including deluxe print edition with color paintings, audio book on 
CD, and interactive DVD edition. 

We carry all of the books translated by His Divine Grace, including 
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Caitanya-Caritamrita, 
Krsna - The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nectar of Devotion, 
Nectar of Instruction, Sri Isopanisad, Teachings of Lord Chaitanya, 
and more. 

Contact us:  

Website: http://www.krishna.com
E-mail: store@krishna.com
Phone: 1-386-462-1241 
Toll-free in USA: 1-800-800-3284 

By mail:  

Krishna.com 
P.O. Box 430 
Alachua, FL 32616 
USA 

 
 
 
 
 
ASIA 
INDIA  
Agartala, Tripura — Assam-Agartala Rd., Banamalipur, 799 001/ Tel. (0381) 22327053/  
Fax: (0381) 2384780/ E-mail: premadatadas@rediffmail.com 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat — Satellite Rd., Gandhinagar Highway Crossing, 380 054/  
 Tel. (079) 2686-1945, 1645, or -2350/ E-mail: jasomatinandan.acbsp@pamho.net 
Allahabad, UP — Hare Krishna Dham, 161 Kashi Raj Nagar, Baluaghat 211 003/  
 Tel. (0532) 415294  
Amritsar, Punjab — Chowk Moni Bazar, Laxmansar, 143 001/ Tel. (0183) 2540177 
Bangalore, Karnataka — Hare Krishna Hill, Chord Rd., 560 010/ Tel. (080) 23471956 or  
23578346/ Fax: (080) 23578625/ E-mail: manjunath36@iskconbangalore.org 
Bangalore, Karnataka — ISKCON Sri Jagannath Mandir, No.5 Sripuram, 1st cross, 
Sheshadripuram, Bangalore 560 020/ Tel. (080) 353-6867 or 226-2024 or 353-0102 
Baroda, Gujarat — Hare Krishna Land, Gotri Rd., 390 021/ Tel. (0265) 231-0630 or 233-1012/ 
E-mail: iskcon.baroda@pamho.net 
Belgaum, Karnataka — Shukravar Peth, Tilak Wadi, 590 006/ Tel. (0831) 243-6267  
or 240-0108/ E-mail: devamrita.rns@pamho.net 
◆ Bhubaneswar, Orissa — N.H. No. 5, IRC Village, 751 015/ Tel. (0674) 2553517, 2553475,  
or 2554283/ E-mail: gm.iskconbbsr.ggs@pamho.net 
Brahmapur, Orissa — Sri Ram Govinda Mandir, Aska Rd., at Post Ankuspur, Brahmapur,  
Dist. Ganjam 761 100/ Tel. (0680) 2485720 
Chandigarh, Punjab — Hare Krishna Dham, Sector 36-B, 160 036/ Tel. (0172) 260-1590  
or 260-3232/ E-mail: iskcon.chandigarh@pamho.net  
Chennai (Madras), TN — Hare Krishna Land, Bhaktivedanta Road, Injambakkam, Off ECR 
Road, Chennai 600 041/ Tel. (044) 501-9303 or 501-9147/  
E-mail: iskconchennai@eth.net 
Coimbatore, TN — Jagannath Mandir, Hare Krishna Land, Aerodrome P.O., Opp. CIT, 641 
014/ 
Tel. (0422) 2626509 or 2626508/ E-mail: info@iskcon-coimbatore.org 
Dwarka, Gujarat — Bharatiya Bhavan, Devi Bhavan Rd., 361 335/ Tel. (02892) 34606/  
Fax: (02892) 34319 
Gadei Giri, Orissa — Post Alabol Via Balikuda, Dist. Jagatsinghpur, 754 108/ (06724) 238112/  
E-mail: srigopalccd@yahoo.co.in 
Guntur, AP — Opp. Sivalayam, Peda Kakani 522 509 
Guwahati, Assam — Ulubari Chariali, South Sarania, 781 007/ Tel. (0361) 254-5963 
Hanumkonda, AP — Neeladri Rd., Kapuwada, 506 011/ Tel. (08712) 77399 
Haridaspur, WB — P.O. Chhaygharia, Bangaon, 24 Parganas, West Bengal 743 704/  
Tel. (03215) 57856 
Haridwar, Uttaranchal — Srila Prabhupada Ashram, G. House, Nai Basti, Mahadev Nagar, 
Bhimgoda, 249 401/ Tel. (01334) 260818 
Hyderabad, AP — Hare Krishna Land, Nampally Station Rd., 500 001/ Tel. (040) 2474-4969  
or 2460-7089/ E-mail: iskcon.hyderabad@pamho.net 
Imphal, Manipur — Hare Krishna Land, Airport Rd., 795 001/ Tel. (0385) 2455245 or 2455247 
or 2455693/ E-mail: manimandir@sancharnet.in 
Indore, MP — ISKCON, Nipania, Indore/ Tel. 9300474043/ E-mail: 

 
mahaman.acbsp@pamho.net 
Jaipur, Rajasthan — ISKCON, Giridhari Dauji Temple, ISKCON Rd., Opp. Vijay Path, 
Mansarovar, Jaipur 302 020 (mail: 84/230, Sant Namdev Marg, Opp. K.V. No. 5, Mansarovar,  
Jaipur 302 020) Tel. (0414) 2782765 or 2781860/ E-mail: jaipur@pamho.net 
Jammu, J&K — Srila Prabhupada Ashram, c/o Shankar Charitable Trust, Shakti Nagar,  
Near AG Ofﬁce/ Tel. (0191) 2582306 
Katra, J&K — Srila Prabhupada Ashram, Sri Kalika Mata Mandir, Katra Vaishnodevi, 182 101/  
Tel. (01991) 233047 
Kolkata (Calcutta), WB — 3C Albert Rd. (behind Minto Park, opp. Birla High School), 700 017/ 
Tel. (033) 2287-3757, -6075, -8242/ E-mail: spci@giasc101.vsnl.net.in 
◆ Kurukshetra, Haryana — 369 Gudri Muhalla, Main Bazaar, 132 118/ Tel. (01744) 234806 
Lucknow, UP — 1 Ashok Nagar, Guru Govind Singh Marg, 226 018/ Tel. (0522) 223556 or 
271551 
Ludhiana, Punjab — Sterling Tower, Vrindavan Rd., Civil Lines, 141001/ Tel. (161) 2770600  
or (161) 3118897 or 98159-40005/ E-mail: iskcon.ludhiana@pamho.net 
Madurai, TN — 37 Maninagaram Main Road, 625 001/ Tel. (0452) 274-6472 
Mangalore, Karnataka — Sri Jagannath Mandir, near Hotel Woodlands, Bunts Hostel Road,  
575 003 (mail: P.O. Box 15, Mangalore 575 001)/ Tel. (0824) 2423326 or 2442756/  
E-mail: iskconmangalore@yahoo.com 
◆ Mayapur, WB — ISKCON, Shree Mayapur Chandrodaya Mandir, Shree Mayapur Dham,  
Dist. Nadia, 741 313/ Tel. (03472) 245239, 245240, or 245233/ Fax: (03472) 245238/  
 E-mail: mayapur.chandrodaya@pamho.net 
Moirang, Manipur — Nongban Enkhol, Tidim Rd./ Tel. 795133 
◆ Mumbai (Bombay), Maharashtra — Hare Krishna Land, Juhu 400 049/ Tel. (022) 2620-
6860/  
 Fax: (022) 2620-5214/ E-mail: info@iskconmumbai.com; guest.house.bombay@pamho.net 
◆ Mumbai, Maharashtra — 7 K. M. Munshi Marg, Chowpatty 400 007/ Tel. (022) 23665500/  
Fax: (022) 2367-7941/ E-mail: info@radhagopinath.com 
Mumbai, Maharashtra — Shristhi Complex, Mira Rd. (E), opposite Royal College, Dist. Thane, 
401 107/ Tel. (022) 28454667 or 28454672/ Fax: (022) 28454981/  
E-mail: jagjivan.gkg@pamho.net 
Mysore, Karnataka — #31, 18th Cross, Jayanagar, 570 014/ Tel. (0821) 2500582 or 6567333/  
E-mail: mysore.iskcon@gmail.com 
Nagpur, Maharashtra — Bhaktivedanta Marg, Srila Prabhupada Town, near Kalmana Market,  
440 008/ Tel. (09370) 164102 or (09823) 014688/ E-mail: rasamandala.lok@pamho.net 
Nellore, AP — ISKCON City, Hare Krishna Rd., 524 004/ Tel. (0861) 2314577 or (092155) 
36589/ E-mail: sukadevaswami@gmail.com 
◆ New Delhi, UP — Hare Krishna Hill, Sant Nagar Main Rd., East of Kailash, 110 065/  
Tel. (011) 2623-5133, 4, 5, 6, 7/ Fax: (011) 2621-5421/  
E-mail: delhi@pamho.net; (Guesthouse) neel.sunder@pamho.net 
New Delhi, UP — 41/77, Punjabi Bagh (West), 110 026/ Tel. (011) 25222851 or 25227478/  
E-mail: iskcon.punjabi.bagh@pamho.net 
Noida, UP — UP-A-5, Sector 33, Institutional Land, opp. NTPC Office, Noida/ Tel. (0120) 
2506211 or 2506363/ E-mail: vbvdas@hotmail.com Pandharpur, Maharashtra — Hare 
Krishna Ashram (across Chandrabhaga River), Dist. Sholapur, 
413 304/ Tel. (02186) 267241 or 267242/ E-mail: iskconpdpr@rediff.com 

Patna, Bihar — Arya Kumar Rd., Rajendra Nagar, 800 016/ Tel. (0612) 687637 or 685081/  
 Fax: (0612) 687635/ E-mail: krishna.kripa.jps@pamho.net 
Pune, Maharashtra — 4 Tarapoor Rd., Camp, 411 001/ Tel. (020) 2633-2328 or 2636-1855/  
E-mail: iyfpune@vsnl.com 
Puri, Orissa — Bhakti Kuti, Swargadwar, 752 001/ Tel. (06752) 231440 
Rajahmundry, AP — Hare Krishna Land, Goutami Ghat, 533 101/ Tel. (0883) 2442277 or 
2442288/  
E-mail: gopinathdasa@yahoo.com 
Raipur, Chhatisgarh — Hare Krishna Land, Alopi Nagar, Opposite Maharshi Vidyalaya, 
Tatibandh, Raipur 492 001/ Tel. (0771) 5037555/ E-mail: iskconraipur@yahoo.com 
Ranaghat, WB — Gourdham, Habibpur, Ranaghat, Dist. Nadia 741 403/Tel. (03473) 281150 or 
281226/ E-mail: shyamrup.jps@pamho.net 
Salem, TN — ISKCON, Hare Krishna Land, Rajaram Nagar, Salem 636 007/  
Tel. (0427) 2418245/ E-mail: iskcon.salem@pamho.net 
Secunderabad, AP — 27 St. John’s Rd., 500 026/ Tel. (040) 780-5232/ Fax: (040) 814021 
Silchar, Assam — Ambikapatti, Silchar, Dist. Cachar, 788 004/ Tel. (03842) 34615 
Siliguri, WB — ISKCON Road, Gitalpara, 734 406/ Tel. (0353) 426619 or 539046 or 539082/  
Fax: (0353) 526130 
Solapur, Maharashtra — C-29/49 Naganaath Laghudyog Society, Near Karnik Nagar, Behind 
Yalialinga Math, Solapur 413 006/ Tel. (098) 9012 8619/ E-mail: ekalavyadas@yahoo.com 
Srirangam, TN — 103, Amma Mandapam Rd., Srirangam, Trichy 620 006/ Tel. (0431) 
2433945/  
E-mail: iskcon_srirangam@yahoo.co.in 
Surat, Gujarat — Rander Rd., Jahangirpura, 395 005/ Tel. (0261) 765891, 765516, or 773386/  
E-mail: surat@pamho.net 
Thiruvananthapuram (Trivandrum), Kerala — Hospital Rd., Thycaud, 695 014/  
Tel. (0471) 2328197/ E-mail: jsdasa@yahoo.co.in 
◆ Tirupati, AP — K.T. Rd., Vinayaka Nagar, 517 507/ Tel. (0877) 2230114 or 2230009/  
E-mail: revati.raman.jps@pamho.net (guesthouse: iskcon_ashram@yahoo.co.in) 
Udhampur, J&K — Srila Prabhupada Ashram, Srila Prabhupada Marg, Srila Prabhupada 
Nagar, 182 101/  
 Tel. (01992) 270298/ E-mail: info@iskconudhampur.com 
Ujjain, MP — Hare Krishna Land, Bharatpuri, 456 010/ Tel. (0734) 2535000 or 34205000/ Fax: 
(0734) 2536000/ E-mail: iskcon.ujjain@pamho.net 
Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat — Opp. B&B Polytechnic, Mota Bazaar, Ananda, 388 120/  
Tel. (02692) 230796 or 233012/ E-mail: samba.jps@pamho.net 
Varanasi, UP — ISKCON, B 27/80 Durgakund Rd., Near Durgakund Police Station,  
Varanasi 221 010/ Tel. (0542) 276422 or 222617 
Vijayawada, AP — Venkatapalem Karakatta Rd., Undavalli Village, Tadepalli Mandal, 
Vijayawada,  
Guntur Dist. 522 501/ Tel. (08645) 272513/ E-mail: mmdasiskconvijayawada@gmail.com 
Visakhapatnam — Hare Krishna land, Sagaranagar 530 045 (mail: ISKCON, D. No. 7-5-108, 
Pandurangapuram Beach Rd., 530 003)/ Tel. (0891)2528376/ Email:samba.jps@pamho.net 
◆ Vrindavan, UP — Krishna-Balaram Mandir, Bhaktivedanta Swami Marg, Raman Reti, 
Mathura Dist.,  
281 124/ Tel. & fax: (0565) 254-0728/ E-mail: iskcon.vrindavan@pamho.net;  

(Guesthouse) Tel. (0565) 254-0022; ramamani@sancharnet.in 
Warangal, AP — Mulugu Rd., Ayappa Pidipally, 506 007/ Tel. (08712) 426182 

RURAL COMMUNITIES 
Ahmedabad District, Gujarat (Hare Krishna Farm) — Katwada (contact ISKCON 
Ahmedabad) 
Assam — Karnamadhu, Dist. Karimganj 
Chamorshi, Maharashtra — 78 Krishnanagar Dham, Dist. Gadhachiroli, 442 603/ Tel. (0218) 
623473 
Hyderabad, AP (New Naimisaranya Farm) — P. O. Dabilpur Village, Medchal Tq., R.R.  
Dist., 501 401/ Tel. (040) 4742018 
Indore, MP (Krishna-Balarama Mandir) — Hare Krishna Vihar, Nipania Village/ Tel. (731) 
572794 
Karnataka (Bhaktivedanta Eco-Village) — Nagodi P.O., Vollur Valley, Hosanagar Taluq, 
Shivmoga District, 577 425 (mail: Garuda Guha, Kollur, D.K. District, 576 220) 
Mayapur, WB — (contact ISKCON Mayapur)  
Puri, Orissa — ISKCON, Bhaktivedanta Ashram, Sipasirubuli, 752 001/ Tel. (06752) 230494 
Surat, Gujarat — Bhaktivedanta Rajavidyalaya, Krishnalok, Surat-Bardoli Rd. Gangapur,  
 P. O. Gangadhara, Dist. Surat, 394 310/ Tel. (02622) 63546 
Vrindavan, UP — Vrinda Kund, Nandagaon, Dist. Mathura, U.P. 

ADDITIONAL RESTAURANT 
Kolkata, WB — Govinda’s, ISKCON House, 22 Gurusaday Road, 700019/  
Tel. (033) 24756922, 24749009 

MALAYSIA 
Bahau — 156 Taman Sornam, Bahau 72100, Negeri Sembilan/ Tel. +60 (6) 481-4350 or 454-
8982/  
 E-mail: paramanandakp@yahoo.com 
Bukit Mertajam — 4 29 Jalan Sungai Rambai, 14000 Bukit Mertajam/ Tel. +60 (4) 538-1276/  
E-mail: arumugam@notes.asemal.com.my 
Ipoh — 15-H Jalan Lang, Jalan Padang, Tembak, 30000 Ipoh Perak, Darul Ridzuan/  
Tel. +60 (5) 506-1601 
Klang — No. 20, Lorong Besi 4, Off Jl. Teluk Pulai, Selangor D.E., 41100/ Tel. +60 (012) 
6342464 or (012) 3179206 or (603) 33712060/ E-mail: ramram991@yahoo.com 
Kuala Lumpur — Lot 9901, Jalan Awan Jawa, Taman Yarl, 58200 Kuala Lumpur/  
Tel. +60 (3) 7980-7355/ Fax: +60 (3) 7981-1644/ E-mail: uttama@tm.net.my 
Kuching — Lot 680, Block 250, Lorong Ketitir 3, Batu Kawa, 93250 Kuching, Sarawak/ 
Tel. +60 (82) 688-708/ E-mail: kripa@tm.net.my 
Penang — 43A Jalan Kebun Bunga, 11350 Penang/ Tel. +60 (4) 229-5958/  
E-mail: isana_gauranga@hotmail.com 
Seremban—28/7J Taman Desa, Temiang, 70200 Seremban, Negeri Sembilan (mail: 14 RJ 
1/1, Taman Rasah Jaya, 70300 Seremban, Negeri Sembilan)/ Tel. +60 (6) 765-1379/  
E-mail: ppnada@tm.net.my 
Sungei Petani — Lot 46, Jalan 1/6, Taman Sri Wang, 08000 Sungei Petani/  

 
 
 
 
E-mail: smahsuﬁ@usm.my 
Taiping — 24 Lorong Panglima (Cator Ave.), Assam Kumbang, 34000 Taiping, Perak D.R.  
(mail: 590 Jalan Wat Siam, Kampung Pinang, 34600 Kamunting, Taiping, Perak)/  
Tel. +60 (5) 807-9702 or 808-1475 
Teluk Intan — Jalan Sungai Manik, 36000 Teluk Intan, Perak/ Tel. +63 (032) 83254 

OTHER COUNTRIES  
Alaminos, Philippines — 4th Floor, Donato's Trading, Fule St., Alaminos, Laguna/  
Tel. +63 (2) 049-5672104 
Bangkok, Thailand — 15/43 Auangfa Villa, Soi Nuanchan, Sukhapibal Rd., Bungkum, 
Bangkok/  
 Tel. +66 (02) 9445346 or (01) 4455401 or (09) 4452919/  
E-mail: swami.bvv.narasimha@pamho.net 
Chittagong, Bangladesh — Caitanya Cultural Society, 23 Nandan Kanan, N.N. Paul Blvd./  
Tel. + 88 (031) 610822 
Colombo, Sri Lanka — 188 New Chetty St., Colombo 13/ Tel. +94 (011) 2433325/ 
E-mail: iskcon@slt.lk 
Dhaka, Bangladesh — 5 Chandra Mohon Basak St., Banagram,1203/ Tel. +880 (02) 236249/  
Fax: (02) 837287/ E-mail: iskcon_bangladesh@yahoo.com 
Hong Kong — 6/F Oceanview Court, 27 Chatham Road South (mail: P.O. Box 98919)/  
Tel. +852 (2) 739-6818/ Fax: +852 (2) 724-2186/ E-mail: iskcon.hong.kong@pamho.net 
Jakarta, Indonesia — Yayasan Radha-Govinda, P.O. Box 2694, Jakarta Pusat 10001/  
Tel. +62 (021) 489-9646/ E-mail: matsyads@bogor.wasantara.net.id 
Jessore, Bangladesh — Nitai Gaur Mandir, Kathakhali Bazaar P. O., Panjia 
Jessore, Bangladesh — Sri Rup-Sanatan Smriti Tirtha Mandir, Ramshara, Magurahat P. O., 
Abhaynagar  
Katmandu, Nepal — Budhanilkantha (mail: GPO Box 3520)/ Tel. +977 (01) 373790 or 373786/ 
Fax: +977 (01) 372976 (Attn: ISKCON)/ E-mail: iskcon@wlink.com.np 
Mandalay, Myanmar — ISKCON Sri Krishna Temple, Corner of 19th Thukha Street, Nanshe, 
Mandalay/ E-mail: sdas108@hotmail.com 
Manila, Philippines — #9105 Banuyo St., San Antonio Village, Makati City/ Tel. & fax: +63 
(02) 8901947; Tel. +63 (02) 8963357/ E-mail: iskconmanila@yahoo.com 
Myitkyina, Myanmar — ISKCON Sri Jagannath Temple, Bogyoke Street, Shansu Taung, 
Myitkyina, Kachin State/ E-mail: mahanadi@mptmail.net.mm 
Osaﬁa, Israel — P.O. Box 2232, Osaﬁa Village 30090/ Tel. +972 (04) 839-2876 
Sylhet, Bangladesh — Sri Sri Radha-Madhava Mandir, Yugalatila, Kazal Sah Rd. 
Tai Pei City, Taiwan — Ting Zhou Road, Sec. 3, No. 192, 4F, Tai Pei City 100/  
Tel. +886 (02) 2365-8641/ E-mail: dayal.nitai.tkg@pamho.net 
Tokyo, Japan — Subaru 1F, 4-19-6 Kamitakada, Nakano-ku, Tokyo 164-0002/  
Tel. +81 (03) 5343-9147 or (090) 6544-9284/ Fax: +81 (03) 5343-3812/  
E-mail: damodara@krishna.jp 
Yogyakarta, Indonesia — P.O. Box 25, Babarsari YK, DIY 
RURAL COMMUNITIES 
 Bangladesh (Kulaura) — Rangirkul Bidyashram, Kulaura, Dist. Moulvibazar/  
 Fax: +880 (08624) 88035 
Bangladesh (Sri Pundarika Dhama) — Mekhla, Hathazari, Dist. Chittagong/ Tel. (031) 

 
610822 
Bangladesh (Comilla) — Jagannathpur, Comilla 
Indonesia (Govinda Kunja) — (contact ISKCON Jakarta) 
Philippines — ISKCON Farm, Fule St., Alaminos Laguna  

NORTH AMERICA  
CANADA 
Calgary, Alberta — 313 Fourth Street N.E., T2E 3S3/ Tel. (403) 265-3302/ Fax: (403) 547-
0795/  
E-mail: vamanstones@shaw.ca 
Edmonton, Alberta — 9353 35th Ave., T6E 5R5/ Tel. (780) 439-9999/  
E-mail: edmonton@harekrishnatemple.com 
Montreal, Quebec — 1626 Pie IX Boulevard, H1V 2C5/ Tel. & fax: (514) 521-1301/  
 E-mail: iskconmontreal@bellnet.ca 
◆ Ottawa, Ontario — 212 Somerset St. E., K1N 6V4/ Tel. (613) 565-6544/ Fax: (613) 565-
2575/  
E-mail: iskconottawa@sympatico.ca 
Regina, Saskatchewan — 1279 Retallack St., S4T 2H8/ Tel. (306) 525-1640 
◆ Toronto, Ontario — 243 Avenue Rd., M5R 2J6/ Tel. (416) 922-5415/ Fax: (416) 922-1021/  
 E-mail: toronto@iskcon.net 
◆ Vancouver, B.C. — 5462 S.E. Marine Dr., Burnaby V5J 3G8/ Tel. (604) 433-9728/  
Fax: (604) 648-8715/ E-mail: akrura@krishna.com; Govinda’s Bookstore & Cafe/  
Tel. (604) 433-7100 or 1-888-433-8722 
RURAL COMMUNITY 
Ashcroft, B.C. — Saranagati Dhama (mail: P.O. Box 99, VOK 1A0)/ E-mail:  
saranagativillage@hotmail.com 
U.S.A. 
Atlanta, Georgia — 1287 South Ponce de Leon Ave. N.E., 30306/ Tel. & fax: (404) 377-8680/  
 E-mail: bala108@earthlink.net 
Austin, Texas — 10700 Jonwood Way, 78753/ Tel. (512) 835-2121/ Fax: (512) 835-8479 
E-mail: sda@backtohome.com 
Baltimore, Maryland —200 Bloomsbury Ave., Catonsville, 21228/ Tel. (410) 719-1776/ Fax: 
(410) 799-0642/ E-mail: info@baltimorekrishna.com 
Berkeley, California — 2334 Stuart Street, 94705/ Tel. (510) 649-8619/ Fax: (510) 665-9366/  
E-mail: rajan416@yahoo.com  
Boise, Idaho — 1615 Martha St., 83706/ Tel. (208) 344-4274/ E-mail: 
boise_temple@yahoo.com 
Boston, Massachusetts — 72 Commonwealth Ave., 02116/ Tel. (617) 247-8611/  
 E-mail: radhagopi@juno.com 
◆ Chicago, Illinois — 1716 W. Lunt Ave., 60626/ Tel. (773) 973-0900/ Fax: (773) 973-0526/  
 E-mail: information@iskconchicago.com 
Columbus, Ohio — 379 W. Eighth Ave., 43201/ Tel. (614) 421-1661/ Fax: (614) 294-0545/ 
E-mail: rmanjari@sbcglobal.net 
◆ Dallas, Texas — 5430 Gurley Ave., 75223/ Tel. (214) 827-6330/ Fax: (214) 823-7264/ 

 
 
 
E-mail: txkrishnas@aol.com; restaurant: vegetariantaste@aol.com 
◆ Denver, Colorado — 1400 Cherry St., 80220/ Tel. (303) 333-5461/ Fax: (303) 321-9052/  
 E-mail: naikatma.acbsp@pamho.net 
Detroit, Michigan — 383 Lenox Ave., 48215/ Tel. (313) 824-6000/ E-mail: 
gaurangi108@hotmail.com 
Gainesville, Florida — 214 N.W. 14th St., 32603/ Tel. (352) 336-4183/ Fax: (352) 379-2927/  
 E-mail: kalakantha.acbsp@pamho.net 
Hartford, Connecticut — 1683 Main St., E. Hartford 06108/ Tel. & fax: (860) 289-7252/ 
E-mail: pyari@sbcglobal.net 
◆ Honolulu, Hawaii — 51 Coelho Way, 96817/ Tel. (808) 595-3947/ E-mail: 
tejaprakash@gmail.com 
Houston, Texas — 1320 W. 34th St., 77018/ Tel. (713) 686-4482/ Fax: (713) 956-9968/  
E-mail: management@iskconhouston.org 
Kansas City, Missouri — Rupanuga Vedic College (Men’s Seminary), 5201 The Paseo, 
64110/  
 Tel. (800) 340-5286/ Fax: (816) 361-0509/ E-mail: info@rvc.edu 
Laguna Beach, California — 285 Legion St., 92651/ Tel. (949) 494-7029/ E-mail:  
pancatattvalagunabeach@earthlink.net 
◆ Los Angeles, California — 3764 Watseka Ave., 90034/ Tel. (310) 836-2676/ Fax: (310) 
839-2715/ E-mail: shastra.krit@pamho.net 
◆ Miami, Florida — 3220 Virginia St., 33133/ Tel. (305) 442-7218/ Fax: (786) 513-0105/  
E-mail: devotionalservice@iskcon-miami.org 
Nashville, Tennessee — 2802 10th Ave. South, 37204/ Tel. (615) 403-7566/  
E-mail: shyamadasi@hotmail.com 
New Orleans, Louisiana — 2936 Esplanade Ave., 70119/ Tel. (504) 304-0032 (office) or (504) 
638-3244/  
E-mail: iskcon.new.orleans@pamho.net 
◆ New York, New York — 305 Schermerhorn St., Brooklyn 11217/ Tel. (718) 855-6714/  
Fax: (718) 875-6127/ E-mail: ramabhadra@aol.com 
New York, New York — 26 Second Avenue, 10003/ Tel. (212) 253-6182/  
E-mail: webmaster@krishnanyc.com  
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania — 41 West Allens Lane, 19119/ Tel. (215) 247-4600/  
Fax: (215) 247-8702/ E-mail: savecows@aol.com 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania — 1408 South St., 19146/ Tel. (215) 985-9335/  
E-mail: savecows@aol.com 
Phoenix, Arizona — 100 S. Weber Dr., Chandler 85226/ Tel. (480) 705-4900/ Fax: (480) 705-
4901/ 
E-mail: svgd108@yahoo.com 
Portland, Oregon — 2095 NW Alocleck Dr., Suite, 1107 & 1109, Hillsboro 97124/ Tel. (503) 
439-9117/ 
E-mail: info@iskconportland.com 
◆ St. Louis, Missouri — 3926 Lindell Blvd., 63108/ Tel. (314) 535-8085 or 534-1708/  
Fax: (314) 535-0672/ E-mail: rpsdas@gmail.com 
◆ San Diego, California — 1030 Grand Ave., Paciﬁc Beach 92109/ Tel. (858) 483-2500/  
Fax: (858) 483-0941/ E-mail: smsandiego@gmail.com 
San Jose, California — 951 S. Bascom Ave., 95128/ Tel. (408) 293-4959/  

E-mail: iskconsanjose@yahoo.com 
Seattle, Washington — 1420 228th Ave. S.E., Sammamish 98075/ Tel. (425) 391-3293/  
Fax: (425) 868-8928/ E-mail: info@iskconseattle.com 
◆ Spanish Fork, Utah — Krishna Temple Project & KHQN Radio, 8628 S. State Rd., 84660/  
Tel. (801) 798-3559/ Fax: (810) 798-9121/ E-mail: carudas@earthlink.net 
Tallahassee, Florida — 1323 Nylic St., 32304/ Tel. & fax: (850) 224-3803/  
E-mail: darudb@hotmail.com 
Towaco, New Jersey — 100 Jacksonville Rd. (mail: P.O. Box 109), 07082/ Tel. & fax: (973) 
299-0970/  
 E-mail: newjersey@iskcon.net  
◆ Tucson, Arizona — 711 E. Blacklidge Dr., 85719/ Tel. (520) 792-0630/ Fax: (520) 791-
0906/  
 E-mail: tucphx@cs.com 
Washington, D.C. — 10310 Oaklyn Dr., Potomac, Maryland 20854/ Tel. (301) 299-2100/  
 Fax: (301) 299-5025/ E-mail: ad@pamho.net 
RURAL COMMUNITIES 
Alachua, Florida (New Raman Reti) — 17306 N.W. 112th Blvd., 32615 (mail: P.O. Box 819, 
32616)/  
 Tel. (386) 462-2017/ Fax: (386) 462-2641/ E-mail: alachuatemple@alltel.net 
Carriere, Mississippi (New Talavan) — 31492 Anner Road, 39426/ Tel. (601) 749-9460 or 
799- 1354/ Fax: (601) 799-2924/ Fax: (601) 799-2924/ E-mail: talavan@hughes.net  
Gurabo, Puerto Rico (New Govardhana Hill) — Carr. 181, Km. 16.3, Bo. Santa Rita, Gurabo  
(mail: HC-01, Box 8440, Gurabo, PR 00778)/ (Ofﬁce) Tel. & fax: (787) 737-4265/  
(Temple) Tel. (787) 712-0358/ E-mail: iskcon_pr@hotmail.com 
Hillsborough, North Carolina (New Goloka) — 1032 Dimmocks Mill Rd., 27278/ Tel. (919) 
732-6492/  
E-mail: bkgoswami@earthlink.net 
◆ Moundsville, West Virginia (New Vrindaban) — R.D. No. 1, Box 319, Hare Krishna Ridge, 
26041/  
Tel. (304) 843-1600; Guest House, (304) 845-5905/ Fax: (304) 854-0023/  
E-mail: mail@newvrindaban.com 
Mulberry, Tennessee (Murari-sevaka) — Rt. No. 1, Box 146-A, 37359/ Tel. (931) 759-6888/ 
 -Fax: (615) 759-5785/ E-mail: visnujana@hotmail.com 
Port Royal, Pennsylvania (Gita Nagari) — R.D. No. 1, Box 839, 17082/ Tel. (717) 527-4101/  
 E-mail: kodwin@yahoo.com 
Sandy Ridge, North Carolina (Prabhupada Village) — 1264 Prabhupada Rd., 27046/  
Tel. (336) 593-9888 
ADDITIONAL RESTAURANTS 
Gurabo, Puerto Rico — Goura's, Calle Andrés Arúz 200, Plaza Nazario, 00778/ Tel. (787) 
712-0000 
Hato Rey, Puerto Rico — Tamal Krishna's Veggie Garden, 131 Eleanor Roosevelt, 00918/ 
Tel. (787) 754-6959/ Fax: (787) 756-7769/ E-mail: tkveggiegarden@aol.com 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania — Govinda's, 1408 South St., 19146/ Tel. (215) 985-9303/  
Fax: (215) 966-1242 
Seattle, Washington — My Sweet Lord, 5521 University Way, 98105/ Tel. (425) 643-4664 

 
EUROPE 
UNITED KINGDOM AND IRELAND 
Belfast, Northern Ireland — Brooklands, 140 Upper Dunmurray Lane, BT17 OHE/  
 Tel. +44 (028) 9062 0530 
Birmingham, England — 84 Stanmore Rd., Edgbaston B16 9TB/ Tel. +44 (0121) 420 4999/ 
E-mail: birmingham@iskcon.org.uk 
Cardif, Wales — The Soul Centre, 116 Cowbridge Rd., Canton/ Tel. +44 (02920) 390391/ 
E-mail: the.soul.centre@pamho.net 
Coventry, England — Kingﬁeld Rd., Coventry (mail: 19 Gloucester St., Coventry CV1 3BZ)/  
 Tel. +44 (024) 7655 2822 or 5420/ E-mail: haridas.kds@pamho.net 
Glasgow, Scotland — Karuna Bhavan, Bankhouse Rd., Lesmahagow, Lanarkshire, ML11 
0ES/  
Tel. +44 (01555) 894790/ Fax: +44 (01555) 894526/ E-mail: karunabhavan@aol.com 
Leicester, England — 21 Thoresby St., North Evington, LE5 4GU/ Tel. +44 (0116) 276 2587/  
 E-mail: pradyumna.jas@pamho.net 
◆ London, England (city) — 10 Soho St., W1D 3DL/ Tel. +44 (020) 7437-3662; residential 
/pujaris, 7439-3606; shop, 7287-0269; Govinda’s Restaurant, 7437-4928/ Fax: +44 (020) 7439-
1127/ 
E-mail: london@pamho.net 
◆ London, England (country) — Bhaktivedanta Manor, Dharam Marg, Hilﬁeld Lane, Watford, 
Herts, WD25 8EZ/ Tel. +44 (01923) 857244/ Fax: +44 (01923) 852896/ E-mail: bhaktivedanta. 
manor@pamho.net; (for accommodations:) accommodations.requests@pamho.net 
London, England (south) — 42 Enmore Road, South Norwood, SE25 5NG/  
Tel. +44 (020) 8656 4296 
London, England (Kings Cross) — 102 Caledonain Rd., Kings Cross, Islington, N1 9DN/ Tel.  
+44 (020) 7168 5732/ E-mail: foodforalluk@aol.com 
Manchester, England — 20 Mayﬁeld Rd., Whalley Range, M16 8FT/ Tel. +44 (0161) 226-4416 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England — 304 Westgate Rd., NE4 6AR/ Tel. +44 (0191) 272 1911/  
 E-mail: newcastle@iskcon.org.uk 
◆ Swansea, Wales — 8 Craddock St., SA1 3EN/ Tel. +44 (01792) 468469/ E-mail:  
iskcon.swansea@pamho.net (restaurant: govin–das@hotmail.com) 

RURAL COMMUNITIES  
Upper Lough Erne, Northern Ireland — Govindadwipa Dhama, Inisrath Island, Derrylin,  
Co. Fermanagh, BT92 9GN/ Tel. +44 (028) 6772 1512/ E-mail: govindadwipa@pamho.net 
London, England — (contact Bhaktivedanta Manor)  
(Programs are held regularly in more than forty other cities in the U.K. For information, contact 
ISKCON Reader Services, P.O. Box 730, Watford WD25 8EZ, UK; www.iskcon.org.uk) 

ADDITIONAL RESTAURANTS  
Dublin, Ireland — Govinda’s, 4 Aungier St., Dublin 2/ Tel. +353 (01) 475 0309/ Fax: +353 (01)  
478 6204/ E-mail: info@govindas.ie 
Dublin, Ireland — Govinda’s, 83 Middle Abbey St., Dublin 1/ Tel. +353 (01) 872 7463/ E-mail:  
info@govindas.ie 
Dublin, Ireland — Govinda's 18 Merrion Row, Dublin 2/ Tel. +353 (01) 661 5095/ E-mail:  
praghosa.sdg@pamho.net 

 
 
GERMANY 
Abentheuer — Boecking Str. 4a, 55767/ Tel. +49 (06782) 980436/ Fax: +49 (06782) 980437/  
 E-mail: info@goloka-dhama.de 
Berlin — Kastanien Allee 3, D-10435/ Tel. +49 (030) 44357296 or 44315921/  
E-mail: harekrishna-berlin@pamho.net 
◆ Cologne — Taunusstr. 40, 51105/ Tel. +49 (0221) 830-1241/ Fax: +49 (0221) 837-0485 
Hamburg — Eiffestrasse 422, 20537 Hamburg/ Tel. +49 (040) 4102848 
Heidelberg — Forum 5, Wohnung 4, Baden-Wurttemberg 69126/ Tel. & fax: +49 (06221) 
384553/  
E-mail: Vipula.ss@pamho.net 
Munich — Wachenheimer Strasse 1, 81539/ Tel. +49 (089) 6880-0288/ Fax: +49 (089) 6880-
0289 
Wiesbaden — Aarstrasse 8B, D-65329 Burg Hohenstein/ Tel. +49 (06120) 904107/  
E-mail: iskcon.wiesbaden@web.de 
RURAL COMMUNITY 
Jandelsbrunn (Simhachalam) — Zielberg 20, 94118/ Tel +49 (08583) 316/ E-mail:  
info@simhachalam.de 
HUNGARY 
Budapest — Lehel Street 15-17, 1039 Budapest/ Tel. +36 (01) 391-0435 or 397-5219/ Fax: 
(060) 514114/ E-mail: budapest@pamho.net 
Debrecen — Csapo u. 1. III./4., 4024 Debrecen/ Tel. +36 (052) 431-727/  
E-mail: debrecen@pamho.net 
Eger — Szechenyi u. 64, 3300 Eger/ Tel. +36 (036) 313-761/ E-mail: eger@pamho.net 
Kecskemet — Felsocsalanos ut 116, 6000 Kecskemet (mail: MKTHK 6001 Kecskemet, P.O. 
Box 546)/ Tel. +36 (076) 480-920/ E-mail: kecskemet@pamho.net 
Pecs — Damjanich u. 22, 7624 Pecs/ Tel. +36 (072) 515-991/ Fax: (072) 313-771/  
E-mail: pecs@pamho.net 
RURAL COMMUNITY 
Somogyvamos — Krsna-völgy, Fö u. 38, 8699 Somogyvamos/ Tel. & fax: +36 (085) 540-002 
or  
 340-185/ E-mail: krisna-volgy@pamho.net 
ADDITIONAL RESTAURANT 
Budapest — Govinda Restaurant, Vigyazo Ferenc Street 4, 1051 Budapest/ Tel. +36 (01) 269-
1625 or 302-2284/ Fax: (01) 473-1310/ E-mail: govinda@nvitel.hu 
ITALY 
Bergamo — Villaggio Hare Krishna (da Medolago strada per Terno d’Isola), 24040 Chignolo 
d’Isola (BG)/ Tel. +39 (035) 4940705/ Fax: +39 (035) 199622233 
Catania — via della Regione 16 - Tarderia, 95030 Pedara CT/ Tel. +39 (095) 7896216 

◆ Rome — Govinda Centro Hare Krsna, via Santa Maria del Pianto, 16, 00186/ Tel. +39 (06) 
68891540/ E-mail: govinda.roma@harekrsna.it 
Vicenza — via Roma 9, 36020 Albettone (VI)/ Tel. +39 (0444) 790573/ Fax: +39 (0444) 
790581/  
E-mail: prabhupadadesh@pamho.net 
 RURAL COMMUNITY  
◆ Florence (Villa Vrindavan) — via Scopeti 108, 50026 San Casciano in Val di Pesa (Fl)/  

 
Tel. +39 (055) 820054/ Fax: +39 (055) 828470/ E-mail: isvaripriya@libero.it 
ADDITIONAL RESTAURANTS 
Milan — Govinda’s, via Valpetrosa 5, 20123/ Tel. +39 (02) 862417 

SPAIN 
Barcelona — Plaza Reial 12, Entlo 2, 08002/ Tel. +34 93 302-5194/  
 E-mail: templobcn@hotmail.com 
Madrid — Espíritu Santo 19, 28004/ Tel. +34 91 521-3096 
Málaga — Ctra. Alora, 3, Int., 29140 Churriana/ Tel. +34 95 262-1038/ E-mail: 
malaga@pamho.net 
RURAL COMMUNITY 
Brihuega (New Vraja Mandala) — (Santa Clara) 19411 Brihuega / Tel. +34 949 280436 
RESTAURANT 
Barcelona — Restaurante Govinda, Plaza de la Villa de Madrid 4–5, 08002/ Tel. +34 (93) 318-
7729 

SWEDEN 
◆ Gothenburg — Karl Johansgatan 57, SE-414 55, Göteborg/ Tel. +46 (031) 879648 
(restaurant: 421462)/ E-mail: info@harekrishnagoteborg.com 
Grödinge — Radha-Krishna Temple, Korsnäs Gård, 14792 Grödinge, Tel.+46 (08) 53029800/  
Fax: +46 (08) 53025062/ E-mail: bmd@pamho.net 
◆ Lund — Bredgatan 28, 222 21/ Tel. +46 (046) 399500; Restaurant: +46 (046) 120413/ 
Fax: +46 (046) 188804/ E-mail: locan@pamho.net 
◆ Stockholm — Fridhemsgatan 22, 11240/ Tel. +46 (08) 654-9002/ Fax: +46 (08) 650-8813/ 
Restaurant: Tel. & fax: +46 (08) 654-9004/ E-mail: lokanatha@hotmail.com 

RURAL COMMUNITY 
Järna — Almviks Gård, 153 95/ Tel. +46 (08551) 52050/ Fax: +46 (08551) 52060/  
 E-mail: almviks.gard@pamho.net 
OTHER COUNTRIES 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands — Van Hilligaertstraat 17, 1072 JX/ Tel. +31 (020) 675-1404  
 or -1694/ Fax: +31 (020) 675-1405/ E-mail: amsterdam@pamho.net 
Antwerp, Belgium — Amerikalei 184, 2000/ Tel. +32 (03) 237-0037 
Basel, Switzerland — St. Jakob-Strasse 33, 4132 Muttenz/ Tel. & fax: +41 (061) 462-0614/  
 E-mail: kgs@pamho.net 
◆ Bratislava, Slovakia — Sikma 27, Bratislava 821 07/ Tel. +421 (0902) 240 693/ E-mail:  
lalitagopi.bvs@zoznam.sk 
Cakovec, Croatia — Radnicka 2, Svaska ves, 40000 Cakovec/ Tel. & fax: +385 (040) 334312 
Copenhagen, Denmark — Skjulhoj Alle 44, 2720 Vanlose, Copenhagen/ Tel. +45 4828 6446/  
Fax: +45 4828 7331/ E-mail: iskcon.denmark@pamho.net 
Helsinki, Finland — Ruoholahdenkatu 24 D (Ill krs) 00180/ Tel. +358 (9) 694-9879/  
Fax: +358 (9) 694-9837/ E-mail: harekrishna@harekrishna.fi 
Kaunas, Lithuania — 37, Savanoryu pr., 3000/ Tel. +370 (7) 22-2574 or 26-8953/  
Fax: +370 (7) 70-6642 
Kokosovce, Slovak Republic — Abranovce 60, 08252 Kokosovce/ Tel. +421 (51) 7798482 
◆ Lisbon, Portugal — Rua Dona Estefania, 91 R/C 1000 Lisboa/ Tel. & fax: +351(01) 314-

 
 
 
0314  
 or 352-0038/ E-mail: iskcon.lisbon@pamho.net  
Ljubljana, Slovenia — Zibertova 27, 1000/ Tel. +386 (01) 4312319 or 4312124/  
Fax: +386 (061) 310815/ E-mail: ananta.rns@pamho.net 
◆ Locarno, Switzerland — Govinda Rama, Via Borghese 14, 6600/ Tel. +41 (091) 752-3851/  
Fax: +41 (091) 752-3852/ E-mail: bhaktya.labhya.hks@pamho.net 
Osijek, Croatia — Ivana Gundulica 9, 31000 Osijek/ Tel. +385 (031) 202759 
Paris, France — 35 Rue Docteur Jean Vaquier, 93160 Noisy le Grand/ Tel. & fax: +33 (01)  
4303-0951/ E-mail: paramgati.swami@pamho.net Porto, Portugal — Rua S. Miguel 19, 4050-
560 (mail: Apartado 4108, 4002-001)/  
Tel. & fax: +351 (0222) 007-223/ E-mail: oriente.porto@teleweb.pt  
Prague, Czech Republic — Jilova 290, Prague 5 - Zlicin 155 21/ Tel. +42 (02) 5795-0391/  
E-mail: info@harekrsna.cz 
Pula, Croatia — Vinkuran centar 58, 52000 (mail: P.O. Box 16)/ Tel. & fax: +385 (052) 573581 
◆ Radhadesh, Belgium — Chateau de Petite Somme, 6940 Septon-Durbuy/ Tel. +32 (086) 
322926  
 (restaurant: 321421)/ Fax: +32 (086) 322929/ E-mail: radhadesh@pamho.net 
◆ Riga, Latvia — 56, K. Baron st., LV1011/ Tel. +371 (02) 27-2490/ Fax: +371 (2) 27-4120 
Rijeka, Croatia — Ivana Zajca 6/2, 51000 Rijeka (mail: P.O. Box 61)/ Tel. +385 (098) 697436/  
 E-mail: dvaraka-gamana.kkd@pamho.net 
Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina — Prosorska 11, 71000/ Tel. +387 (033) 644 387/ E-mail:  
templesarajevo@yahoo.com  
Skopje, Macedonia — Vvz. “ISKCON,” Roze Luksemburg 13, 91000/ Tel. +389 (091) 201451 
Soﬁa, Bulgaria — 4 J. Kjuri Str., 1113 Soﬁa/ Tel. +359 (02) 9719714/ E-mail: 
oks_sofia@abv.bg 
Soﬁa, Bulgaria — 119 Kliment Ohridski Str., kv. Malinova Dolina/ Tel. +359 (02) 9616050/  
E-mail: oks_sofia@abv.bg 
◆ Tallinn, Estonia — Luise Street 11a, 10142/ Tel. +372 6460047/ E-mail: 
info@harekrishna.ee 
Timisoara, Romania — Porumbescu 92, 1900/ Tel. & fax +40 (056) 154776/ 
Vilnius, Lithuania — 23-1, Raugyklos G, 2024/ Tel. +370 (5) 2135218/ E-mail: 
vilnius@pamho.net 
Warsaw, Poland — Mysiadlo k. Warszawy, 05-500 Piaseczno, ul. Zakret 11/  
Tel. +48 (022) 750-7797 or -8247/ Fax: +48 (022) 750-8249/ E-mail: kryszna@post.pl 
Wroclaw, Poland — ul. Brodzka 157, 54-067 Wroclaw/ Tel. & fax: +48 (071) 354-3802 Zagreb, 
Croatia — Centar Za Vedske Studije, II Bizet 36, 10000 (mail: P.O. Box 68, 10001)/  
 Tel. & fax: +385 (01) 3772-643/ E-mail: ripuha@pamho.net 
Zürich, Switzerland — Bergstrasse 54, 8030/ Tel. +41 (01) 262-3388/ Fax: +41 (01) 262-
3114/  
E-mail: kgs@pamho.net 
RURAL COMMUNITIES 
Czech Republic — Krisnuv Dvur, Mestecko u Benesova, Postupice 257 01/ Tel. +420 (0603) 
700512 or 215380/ E-mail: farma@krisnuvdvur.cz 
France (La Nouvelle Mayapura) — Domaine d’Oublaisse, 36360, Lucay le Mâle/ 
 Tel. +33 (02) 5440-2395/ Fax: +33 (02) 5440-2893/ E-mail: oublaise@free.fr 
Poland (New Santipur) — Czarnow 21, 58-424 Pisarzowice, woj. dolnoslaskie/  

Tel. +48 (075) 744-8892/ E-mail: radhu@wp.pl 
ADDITIONAL RESTAURANTS 
Copenhagen, Denmark — Govinda’s, Nøerre Farimagsgade 82, DK-1364 Kbh K/ Tel. +45 
3333-7444 
Oslo, Norway — Krishna’s Cuisine, Kirkeveien 59B, 0364/ Tel. +47 (022) 606-250 
Prague, Czech Republic — Govinda’s, Soukenicka 27, 110 00 Prague 1/ Tel. +420 (02) 2481- 
6631 or 2481-6016/ E-mail: info@harekrsna.cz 
Prague, Czech Republic — Govinda’s, Na hrazi 5, 180 00 Prague 8–Liben/ Tel. +420 (02) 
8482- 3805/ E-mail: restaurace@govinda.cz 
Prague, Czech Republic — Balarama, Orlicka 9, 130 00 Praha 3–Vinohrady/  
Tel. +420 (02) 2272 8885/ E-mail: info@balarama.cz 
Presov, Slovak Republic — Govinda’s, Hlavna 70, 08001/ Tel. +0042 (191) 722 819 
Tallinn, Estonia — Damodara, Lauteri Street 1, 10114/ Tel. +372 6442650 
Zürich, Switzerland — Govinda’s Veda-Kultur, Preyergasse 16, 8001/ Tel. & fax: +41 (01) 251 
88 59/  
E-mail: info@govinda-shop.ch 

COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES  
RUSSIA 
Astrahan — 141052, 8-59, Botvina st./ Tel. +7 (8510) 28-9431 
Chita — 27, Kurnatovskogo st./ Tel. +7 (30222) 23-4971 or -0911 
Ekaterinburg — 620078, G. Ekaterinburg, per. Otdelniy 5DK VOG/ Tel. +7 (3432) 74-2200 or 
49-5262 
Irkutsk — st. Krimskaya 6A/ Tel. (3952) 38-71-32 or 3240-62/ E-mail: irkutsk@cis.pamho.net 
Kazan — 13, Sortirovochnaya st, pos.Yudino/ Tel. +7 (8432) 55-2529 or 42-9991 
Krasnodar — 418, Stepnaya st., selo Elizavetinskoye, Krsnodarski krai/ Tel. +7 (8612) 50-
1694 
Kurjinovo — 8, Shosseinaya st., pos. Ershovo, Urupski region, Karachayevo-Cherkessia 
Moscow — 8/3, Khoroshevskoye sh. (mail: P.O. Box 69), 125284/ Tel. +7 (095) 255-6711/ Tel. 
& fax: +7 (095) 945-3317 
Moscow — Nekrasovsky pos., Dmitrovsky reg., 141700/ Tel. +7 (095) 577-8543, -8601, or -
8775/  
Fax: +7 (095) 446-4746 
Murmansk — 16, Frolova st. (mail: P.O. Box 5823)/ Tel. +7 (8152) 58-9284/  
E-mail: upendra@mun.rospac.ru 
Nijny Novgorod — 14b, Chernigovskaya Str., 603001/ Tel. +7 (8312) 30-5197 or 25-2592 
Novorossiysk — 117, Shillerovskaya st./ Tel. +7 (86134) 38-926 or 51-415 
Novosibirsk —18/2 Kholodilynaya st., 630001/ Tel. +7 (3832) 46-2655 or -2666  
Omsk — 664099, 42 10th Severnaya st. (mail: P.O. Box 8741)/ Tel. +7 (3812) 24-5310 or 41-
4051 
Perm — 76, Generala Chernyakhovskogo, 614000/ Tel. +7 (342) 2755002 or 2260681/ E-mail:  

 
prema.vardhana.das@cis.pamho.net 
Rostov-Na-Donu — 84/1, Saryana st., 344025 (mail: P.O. Box 64, 344007)/ Tel. & fax: +7 
(8632) 51-0456 
Samara — 122, Aeroportovskoye sh., Zubchininovka/ Tel. +7 (8462) 97-0318 or -0323  
Simbirsk — 10, Glinki st., 432002/ Tel. +7 (8422) 21-4016  
Sochi — 81a, Lesnaya st., Bytha/ Tel. +7 (8622) 98-5639/ Tel. & fax: +7 (8622) 97-2483 
Ulan-Ude — Prirechnaya str. 23, 670013 (mail: P.O. Box 4268, 670000)/ Tel. +7 (3012) 30-
795/ 
E-mail: ulan.ude@cis.pamho.net 
Vladimir — Ul. Nikolo-Galeyskaya 56/25, 60000/ Tel. +7 (0922) 32-6726 
Vladivostok — Pikhtovaya St., 33/ Tel. +7 (4232) 35-30-26/ E-mail: nram@list.ru 
RESTAURANTS 
Ekaterinburg — Sankirtana, 33 Bardina st./ Tel. +7 (3432) 41-2737 
St. Petersburg — Govinda’s, 58, Angliysky pr., 190008/ Tel. +7 (812) 113-7896 
Vladivostok — Vedic Cuisine, 12, Oleansky pr./ Tel. +7 (4232) 26-89-43/ E-mail: nram@list.ru 
UKRAINE 
Dnepropetrovsk — Spusk Kalininskiy 39, 320038/ Tel. +380 (0562) 42-3631 or 45-4709/  
E-mail: madan_gopal_psm@mail.ru 
Donetsk — 22, Rubensa st., Makeyevka 339018/ Tel. +380 (0622) 94-9104 or -3140/  
 E-mail: premada@iskcon.donetsk.ua 
Kharkov — 43, Verknegievskaya St., Holodnaya Gora, 310015/ Tel. +380 (0572) 20-2167  
or 72-6869/ E-mail: kharkov@cis.pamho.net 
Kiev — 21V, Dmitrievskaya ap.13, 01054/ Tel. +380 (044) 484-4042 or 482-1041/ 
Tel. & fax +380 (044) 484-0934 
Kiev — 16, Zorany per., 04078/ Tel. +380 (044) 433-8312, or 434-7028 or -5533 
Nikolaev — 5-8, Sudostroitelny per., 327052/ Tel. +380 (0510) 35-1734 
Vinnica — 5, Chkalov st., 28601/ Tel. +380 (0432) 32-3152 
OTHER COUNTRIES 
Baku, Azerbaijan — 2, Zardobi per., Uzbekistan st., pos. 8th km. 370060/ Tel. +994 (12) 21-
2376 
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan — 5, Omsky per., 720007/ Tel. +7 (3312) 24-2230 or 44-3776 
Dushanbe, Tajikistan — 38, Anzob st., 734001/ Tel. +7 (3772) 27-1920 or -3990/  
 E-mail: gurupriy a@cada.tajik.net 
Kishinev, Moldova — 13, A. Popovich st., 277022/ Tel. +373 (2) 55-8099 or 76-9254 
Minsk, Belarus — 11, Pavlova st., 220053/ Tel. +375 (172) 13-0629 
Sukhumi, Georgia — st. Pr-t Mira d 274/ Tel. +995 (8122) 2-9954 
Tashkent, Uzbekistan — 54, A. Kodirov St., Mirabad Tumani, 700005/ Tel. & fax: +998 (71) 
1918501/ 
E-mail: tashkentmandir@mail.ru 

Tbilisi, Georgia — 16, Kacharava st., Avchalskoye sh., 380053/ Tel. +995 (32) 62-3326 or 98-
5812 
RESTAURANT 
Almaty, Kazakhstan — Govinda's, 39 Ablay Khan Avenue, Almaty City 050004/ Tel. +7 (327)  
271-0836/ Fax: +7 (327) 271-3235/ E-mail: almaty@pamho.net 

AUSTRALASIA 
AUSTRALIA 
Adelaide — 25 Le Hunte St. (mail: P.O. Box 114, Kilburn, SA 5084)/ Tel. & fax: +61 (08)  
8359-5120/ E-mail: iskconsa@tpg.com.au 
Brisbane — 95 Bank Rd., Graceville (mail: P.O. Box 83, Indooroopilly), QLD 4068/  
Tel. +61 (07) 3379-5455/ Fax: +61 (07) 3379-5880/ E-mail: brisbane@iskcon.org.au 
Canberra — 1 Quick St., Ainslie, ACT 2602 (mail: P.O. Box 1411, Canberra, ACT 2601)/  
Tel. & fax: +61 (02) 6262-6208/ E-mail: iskcon@harekrishnacanberra.com 
Melbourne — 197 Danks St. (mail: P.O. Box 125), Albert Park, VIC 3206/  
Tel. +61 (03) 9699-5122/ Fax: +61 (03) 9690-4093/ E-mail: melbourne@pamho.net 
Newcastle — 28 Bull St., Mayﬁeld, NSW 2304/ Tel. +61 (02) 4967-7000/  
E-mail: iskcon_newcastle@yahoo.com.au  
Perth — 144 Railway Parade (corner of The Strand) [mail: P.O. Box 102], Bayswater, WA 
6053/  
Tel. +61 (08) 9370-1552/ Fax: +61 (08) 9272-6636/ E-mail: iskconperth@optusnet.com.au 
Sydney — 180 Falcon St., North Sydney, NSW 2060 (mail: P.O. Box 459, Cammeray, NSW 
2062)/ Tel. +61 (02) 9959-4558/ Fax: +61 (02) 9957-1893/ E-mail: info@iskcon.com.au 
Sydney — Govinda’s Yoga and Meditation Centre, 112 Darlinghurst Rd., Darlinghurst NSW 
2010 (mail: P.O Box 174, Dings Cross 1340)/ Tel. +61 (02) 9380-5162/ Fax: +61 (02) 9360-
1736/  
E-mail: sita@govindas.com.au 
RURAL COMMUNITIES 
Bambra, VIC (New Nandagram) — 50 Seaches Outlet, off 1265 Winchelsea Deans Marsh 
Rd., Bambra VIC 3241/ Tel. +61 (03) 5288-7383  
Cessnock, NSW (New Gokula) — Lewis Lane (off Mount View Rd., Millﬁeld, near Cessnock 
[mail: P.O. Box 399, Cessnock, NSW 2325])/ Tel. +61 (02) 4998-1800/ Fax: (Sydney temple) 
Murwillumbah, NSW (New Govardhana) — Tyalgum Rd., Eungella (mail: P.O. Box 687),  
NSW 2484/ Tel. +61 (02) 6672-6579/ Fax: +61 (02) 6672-5498/ E-mail: ajita@in.com.au 
RESTAURANTS 
Brisbane — Govinda’s, 99 Elizabeth St., 1st ﬂoor, QLD 4000/ Tel. +61 (07) 3210-0255 
Brisbane — Krishna’s Cafe, 1st Floor, 82 Venture St., West End, QLD 4000/ E-mail: 
brisbane@pamho.net 
Cairns — Gaura Nitai’s, 55 Spence St., Cairns, QLD/ Tel. +61 (07) 4031-2255 or (0425) 725 
901/  
Fax: +61 (07) 4031 2256/ E-mail: gauranitais@in.com.au 
Maroochydore — Govinda’s Vegetarian Cafe, 2/7 First Avenue, QLD 4558/ Tel. +61 (07) 
5451-0299 Melbourne — Crossways, 1st Floor, 123 Swanston St., VIC 3000/ Tel. +61 (03) 
9650-2939 
Melbourne — Gopal’s, 139 Swanston St., VIC 3000/ Tel. +61 (03) 9650-1578 

 
Newcastle — Govinda's Vegetarian Cafe, 110 King Street, corner of King & Wolf Streets,  
NSW 2300/ Tel. +61 (02) 4929-6900 / E-mail: info@govindascafe.com.au 
Perth — Hare Krishna Food for Life, 200 William St., Northbridge, WA 6003/ Tel. +61 (08) 
9227- 1684/ E-mail: perth@pamho.net 
NEW ZEALAND, FIJI, AND PAPUA NEW GUINEA  
Auckland, NZ — The Loft, 1st Floor, 103 Beach Road/ Tel. +64 (09) 3797301 
Christchurch, NZ — 83 Bealey Ave. (mail: P.O. Box 25-190)/ Tel. +64 (03) 366-5174/  
Fax: +64 (03) 366-1965/ E-mail: iskconchch@clear.net.nz 
Hamilton, NZ — 188 Maui St., RD 8, Te Rapa/ Tel. +64 (07) 850-5108/  
E-mail: rmaster@wave.co.nz 
Labasa, Fiji — Delailabasa (mail: P.O. Box 133)/ Tel. +679 812912 
Lautoka, Fiji — 5 Tavewa Ave. (mail: P.O. Box 125)/ Tel. +679 666 4112/ E-mail:  
regprakash@excite.com 
Nausori, Fiji — Hare Krishna Cultural Centre, 2nd Floor, Shop & Save Building 11 Gulam Nadi 
St., Nausori Town (mail: P.O. Box 2183, Govt. Bldgs., Suva)/ Tel. +679 9969748  
or 3475097/ Fax: +679 3477436/ E-mail: vdas@frca.org.fj  
Rakiraki, Fiji — Rewasa (mail: P.O. Box 204)/ Tel. +679 694243 
Sigatoka, Fiji — Queens Road, Olosara (mail: P.O. Box 1020)/ Tel. +679 6520866 or 6500349/  
E-mail: drgsmarna@connect.com.fj 
 Suva, Fiji — 166 Brewster St. (mail: P.O. Box 4229)/  
Tel. +679 331 8441/ Fax: +679 331 9097/ E-mail: iskconsuva@connect.com.fj Wellington, NZ 
— 105 Newlands Rd., Newlands/ Tel. +64 (04) 478-4108/  
E-mail: iskcon.wellington@paradise.net.nz 
Wellington, NZ — Gaura Yoga Centre, 1st Floor, 175 Vivian St. (mail: P.O. Box 6271,  
Marion Square)/ Tel. +64 (04) 801-5500 
RURAL COMMUNITY 
Auckland, NZ (New Varshan) — Hwy. 28, Riverhead, next to Huapai Golf Course (mail: R.D. 
2, Kumeu)/ Tel. +64 (09) 412-8075/ Fax: +64 (09) 412-7130 
RESTAURANTS 
Auckland, NZ — Hare Krishna Food for Life, 268 Karangahape Road/ Tel. +64 (09) 300-7585 
Labasa, Fiji — Hare Krishna Restaurant, Naseakula Road/ Tel. +679 811364  
Lautoka, Fiji — Gopal’s, Corner of Yasawa St. and Naviti St./ Tel. +679 662990 
Suva, Fiji — Hare Krishna Vegetarian Restaurant, Dolphins FNPF Place, Victoria Parade/  
Tel. +679 314154/ E-mail: vdas@govnet.gov.fj 
Suva, Fiji — Hare Krishna Vegetarian Restaurant, Opposite University of the South Paciﬁc,  
Laucala Bay Rd./ Tel. +679 311683/ E-mail: vdas@govnet.gov.fj 
Suva, Fiji — Hare Krishna Vegetarian Restaurant, 18 Pratt St./ Tel. +679 314154 
Suva, Fiji — Hare Krishna Vegetarian Restaurant, 82 Ratu Mara Rd., Samabula/ Tel. +679 
386333 
Suva, Fiji — Hare Krishna Vegetarian Restaurant, Terry Walk, Cumming St./ Tel. +679 312295  
AFRICA  
GHANA 
Accra — Samsam Rd., Off Accra-Nsawam Hwy., Medie, Accra North (mail: P.O. Box 11686)/  
 Tel. & fax +233 (021) 229988 
Kumasi — Twumduase Land, Near Emina Hospital (mail: P.O. Box KS 10076)/  
E-mail: shastra316@yahoo.com 

Nkawkaw — P. O. Box 69 
Sunyani — Plot No. 146, South Ridge Estates (mail P.O. Box 685) 
Takoradi — New Amanful, P.O. Box 328 
Tarkwa — State Housing Estate, Cyanide 
RURAL COMMUNITY  
Eastern Region — Hare Krishna Farm Community, P.O. Box 15, Old Akrade 
NIGERIA 
Abeokuta — Ibadan Rd., Obanatoka (mail: P.O. Box 5177) 
Benin City — 108, Lagos-Uselu Rd. (mail: P.O. Box 1207)/ Tel. +234 (052) 258636 
Enugu — 5/6, Destiny Layout, Old Abakaliki Rd., Near Enugu Airport, Emene  
Ibadan — Ibadan-Lagos Express Way, Opposite Ile-Marun (mail: UIPO Box 9996)/  
E-mail: gboyega@ibadan.skannet.com 
Jos — Airforce Base, Abattoir Rd., by Nammua, Giring Village (mail: P.O. Box 6557) 
Kaduna — Federal Housing Estate, Abuja Rd. (mail: P.O. Box 1121), Goningora Village/  
 Tel. +234 (062) 231335  
Lagos — 12, Gani Williams Close, off Osolo Way, Ajao Estate, International Airport Rd.  
(mail: P.O. Box 8793, Marina)/ Tel. +234 (01) 7744926 or 7928906/  
E-mail: bddswami@pamho.net 
Port Harcourt — Umuebule 11, 2nd tarred road (mail: P.O. Box 4429), Trans Amadi 
Warri — Okwodiete Village, Kilo 8, Effurun/Orerokpe Rd. (mail: P.O. Box 1922) 
SOUTH AFRICA  
Cape Town — 17 St. Andrews Rd., Rondebosch 7700/ Tel. +27 (021) 6861179/  
 Fax: +27 (021) 686-8233/ E-mail: cape.town@pamho.net 
◆ Durban — 50 Bhaktivedanta Swami Circle, Unit 5 (mail: P.O. Box 56003), Chatsworth, 
4030/  
 Tel. +27 (031) 403-3328/ Fax: +27 (031) 403-4429/ E-mail: iskcon.durban@pamho.net  
Johannesburg — 7971 Capricorn Ave. (entrance on Nirvana Drive East), Ext. 9, Lenasia (mail: 
P.O. Box 926, Lenasia 1820)/ Tel. +27 (011) 854-1975 or 7969/ E-mail: iskconjh@iafrica.com 
Pretoria — 1189 Church St., Hatﬁeld 0083 (mail: P.O. Box 14077, Hatﬁeld 0028)/  
Tel. & fax: +27 (12) 342-6216/ E-mail: iskconpt@global.co.za 
OTHER COUNTRIES 
Abidjan, Cote D’Ivoire — AICK-CI, 01 B.P. 8366/ Tel. & fax +225 563402  
Baie du Cap, Mauritius — St. Martin/ Tel. +230 521-0028 
Gaboronne, Botswana — P.O. Box 201003/ Tel. +267 307768/ Fax: +267 301988/  
E-mail: dkkoshal@infow.bw 
Kampala, Uganda — 9 Dewington Rd. (mail: P.O. Box 1647), Kampala/ Tel. +256 7564-2741 
Kisumu, Kenya — Cairo Rd., P.O. Box 9202/ Tel. +254 (035) 40983/ Fax: +254 (035) 43827 
◆ Lome, Togo — Sis Face Place Bonke, Cote Blue Night, Tokoin Hospital, 01 BP 3105/ Tel. + 
228 2217477 or 9028793/ E-mail: varaha.bts@pamho.net 
Marondera, Zimbabwe — 6 Pine Street (mail: P.O. Box 339)/ Tel. +263 (028) 887-7801 
Mombasa, Kenya — Hare Krishna House, Sauti Ya Kenya and Kisumu Rds.  
(mail: P.O. Box 82224)/ Tel. +254 (011) 312248 
Nairobi, Kenya — Muhuroni Close, off West Nagara Rd. (mail: P.O. Box 28946)/  
 Tel. +254 (0203) 744365/ Fax: +254 (0203) 740957/ E-mail: iskcon_nairobi@yahoo.com 
◆ Phoenix, Mauritius — Hare Krishna Land, Pont Fer (mail: P. O. Box 108, Quartre Bornes)/  
Tel. +230 696-5804/ Fax: +230 696-8576/ E-mail: iskcon.hkl@intnet.mu 

Rose Belle, Mauritius —Shivala Lane/ Tel. +230 627-5030 
RURAL COMMUNITIES 
Mauritius (ISKCON Vedic Farm) — Hare Krishna Rd., Vrindaban/ Tel. +230 418-3185  
or 418-3955/ Fax: +230 418-6470 
Uganda (Hare Krishna Farm) — Seeta Town, Kampala  

LATIN AMERICA 
ARGENTINA 
Buenos Aires — Centro Bhaktivedanta, Andonaegui 2054, Villa Urquiza, CP 1431/  
 Tel. +54 (01) 523-4232/ Fax: +54 (01) 523-8085/ E-mail: iskcon-ba@gopalnet.com 
 Rosario — Paraguay 556 (2000)/ Tel. +54 (041) 252630 or 264243/ Fax: +54 (041) 490838 
 San Miguel — Muqoz 1745, entre Concejal Tribulato y Espaqa, (1663), Pcia. Buenos Aires/  
 Tel. +54 (011) 4664-6631 or 4667-0483/ E-mail: bhaktiyoga@sinectis.com.ar 
 RURAL COMMUNITY 
 Bhaktilata Puri — Ciudad de la Paz 3554 (1429) Capital Federal/ Tel. & fax: +54 (01) 523-
8085 
 RESTAURANTS 
 Buenos Aires — Jagannath Prasadam, Triunvirato 4266 (1431)/ Tel. +54 (01) 521-3396 
 Buenos Aires — Restaurante Tulasi, Marcelo T. de Alvear 628, Local 30 
 BOLIVIA 
 Cochabamba — Av. Heroinas E-435 Apt. 3 (mail: P. O. Box 2070)/ Tel. & fax: +591 (042) 
54346 
◆ Santa Cruz — Calle 27 de Mayo No. 99 esq. Justo Bazan/ Tel. & fax: +591 (03) 345189 
RURAL COMMUNITY 
Bolivia — (contact ISKCON Cochabamba)  
ADDITIONAL RESTAURANTS  
Cochabamba — Restaurant Gopal, calle España N-250 (Galeria Olimpia)/ Tel. +591 (042) 
34082 
Cochabamba — Restaurant Govinda, calle Mexico #E0303/ Tel. +591 (042) 22568 
Cochabamba — Restaurant Tulasi, Av. Heroinas E-262 
Oruro — Restaurant Govinda, Calle 6 de Octubre No. 6071 
Santa Cruz — Snack Govinda, Calle Bolivar esq. Av. Argomosa (primer anillo)/ Tel. +591 (03)  
345189 
Sucre — Restaurant Sat Sanga, Calle Tarapacá No. 161/ Tel. +591 (64) 22547  
BRAZIL 
Belo Horizonte, MG — Rua Ametista, 212, Prado, 30410-420/ Tel. +55 (31) 3337-7645 
◆ Curitiba, PR — Rua Panamá, Bairro Bacacheri, Curitiba 82510-170/ Tel. +55 (41) 3015-
5106/  
E-mail: iskconctba@yahoo.com.br 
◆ Porto Alegre, RS — Rua Jose Bonifacio, 605, Bom Fim, 90040-130/ Tel. +55 (51) 3332-
1704/  
E-mail: iskconportoalegre@midiadeva.net
◆ Recife, PE — Rua Bernardo Guimaraes, 114, Boa Vista, 50050-440/ Tel. +55 (32) 214-
2021/  
E-mail: nitaygouranga@ig.com.br
Rio de Janeiro, RJ — Rua Vilhena de Morais, 309, Barra da Tijuca, 22793-140/  

  
Tel. +55 (21) 2491-1887/ E-mail: sergio.carvalho@pobox.com
Salvador, BA — Rua Alvaro Adorno, 17, Brotas, 40255-460/ E-mail: 
salvador@iskconbahia.com.br
Sao Paulo, SP — Rua do Paraiso, 694, Paraiso, 04103-000/ Tel. +55 (11) 3263-0975/  
E-mail: comunicacaomandir@grupos.com.br
Suzano, SP — Rua XV, 585, Jardim Gardenia, 08696-550/ Tel. +55 (11) 4752-2553/  
E-mail: info@suzanomandir.com.br 
RURAL COMMUNITIES 
Caruaru, PE (Nova Vrajadhama) — Serra dos Cavalos, Distrito de Murici,  
P. O. Box 283, 55000-000/ E-mail: yagnivi@yahoo.com.br 
Parati, RJ (Goura Vrindavana) — P.O. Box 74.862, 23970-000/ Tel. +55 (24) 3371-7364/  
E-mail: goura@paratyweb.com.br 
◆ Pindamonhangaba, SP (Nova Gokula) — Ribeirao Grande, P.O. Box 1009, 12400-990/  
Tel. +55 (12) 3645-8238/ E-mail: giriraj@ig.com.br 
Teresopolis, RJ (Vrajabhumi) — Prata dos Aredes, P. O. Box 92430, 25953-970/ 
Tel. +55 (21) 2644-7213/ E-mail: lrvraja@uol.com.br 
ADDITIONAL RESTAURANTS 
Campina Grande, PB — Govinda, Rua Teodosio de Oliveira Ledo, 144, Centro, 58101-440/  
Tel. +55 (83) 342-0239/ E-mail: mahanm12000@yahoo.com.br 
Curitiba, PR — ISKCON Restaurant, R. Paula Gomes, 123, Proximo Shopping Muller, Curitiba 
80510- 070/ Tel. +55 (41) 3024-5225 
Sao Paulo, SP — Gopala Prasada, Rua Antonio Carlos, 413, 01309-011/ Tel. +55 (11) 3283- 
3867/ E-mail: gopalaprasada@bol.com.br 
MEXICO 
◆ Guadalajara — Pedro Moreno No. 1791, Sector Juarez, Jalisco, 261278/ Tel. +52 (33) 616-
4481 
Mexico City — Tiburcio Montiel 45, Colonia San Miguel, Chapultepec D.F., 11850/  
 Tel. +52 (55) 273-1953/ Fax: +52 (55) 272-5944 
Monterrey — Juan Ignacio Ramón 841, Col. Barrio Antiguo, entre Dr. Coss y Diego de 
Montemayor, Zona Centro, Nuevo León, 64000/ Tel. +52 (88) 8340 5950 
Monterrey — Playa Revolcadero 3329, Col. Primavera, c.p. 64830/ Tel. +52 (81) 83871883/  
E-mail: ambujaksa.gps@pamho.net 
Saltillo — Blvd. Saltillo No. 520, Col. Buenos Aires/ Tel. +52 (84) 178752/ E-mail: 
ramayana@todito.com 
Tulancingo — Apartado 252, Hildago/ Tel. +52 (775) 34072 
RURAL COMMUNITIES 
Guadalajara — (contact ISKCON Guadalajara) 
Veracruz — Mail: Jesus Garcia 33, Col. Ferrocarril, Cerro Azul/ E-mail: 
libbhkti@mail.internet.com.mx 
ADDITIONAL RESTAURANT 
Veracruz — Restaurante Radhe, Sur 5 No. 50, Orizaba, Ver./ Tel. +52 (2717) 14825 
PERU 
Lima — Pasaje Solea 101, Santa Maria-Chosica/ Tel. +51 (511) 360 3381 

◆ Lima — Schell 634 Miraﬂores/ Tel. +51 (014) 444-2871 
◆ Lima — Av. Garcilaso de la Vega 1670/ Tel. +51 (014) 433-2589 
RURAL COMMUNITY 
 Correo De Bella Vista — DPTO De San Martin 
 ADDITIONAL RESTAURANT 
 Cuzco — Espaderos 128 
 OTHER COUNTRIES 
 Asunción, Paraguay — Centro Bhaktivedanta, Mariano R. Alonso 925/ Tel. +595 (021) 480-
266/ Fax: +595 (021) 490-449 

Cali, Colombia — Avenida 2 EN, #24N-39/ Tel. +57 (023) 68-88-53 
 Caracas, Venezuela — Av. Los Proceres (con Calle Marquez del Toro), San Bernardino, 
Caracas, Venezuela/ Tel. +58 (212) 550-1818 
 Chinandega, Nicaragua — Ediﬁcio Hare Krsna No. 108, Del Banco Nacional 10 mts. abajo/  
 Tel. +505 (341) 2359  
 Essequibo Coast, Guyana — New Navadvipa Dham, Mainstay, Essequibo Coast/ Tel. +592 
771-4894 
 Guatemala, Guatemala — Calzada Roosevelt 4-47 tercer nivel, Zona 11  
 Guayaquil, Ecuador — 6 de Marzo 226 and V. M. Rendon/ Tel. +593 (04) 308412 or 309420/  
 Fax: +564 302108/ E-mail: gurumani@gu.pro.ec 
 Panama, Republic of Panama — Via las Cumbres, entrada Villa Zaita, casa #10, frente a 
INPSA, (mail: P.O. Box 6-1776, El Dorado)/ Tel. +507 231-6561/ E-mail: 
iskconpanama@hotmail.com 
 Paramaribo, Suriname — Kwattaweg #459 (mail: P.O. Box 713)/ Tel. +597 435051/  
 E-mail: iskconsur@hotmail.com 
 Pereira, Colombia — Carrera 5a, No.19-36 
 San Salvador, El Salvador — Cuidad Merliot (mail: Apartado Postal 1506)/ Tel. +503 78-0799 
 Santiago, Chile — Carrera 330/ Tel. +56 (02) 698-8044/ E-mail: 
adikesavadasa@yahoo.com.ar 
 Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic — Calle San Francisco de Asis No. 73, Ensanche 
Ozama/  
 Tel. +809 597-5078/ E-mail: svats1949@hotmail.com 
 Tegucipalpa, Honduras — (mail: Apartado Postal 30305)/ Tel. +504 32-3172/ Fax. +504 34-
780 
 Trinidad and Tobago, West Indies — Eastern Main Rd., Garden Village, Arouca (mail: B. 
Narine, Rice Mill Rd., Garden Village, Arouca)/ Tel. +1 (868) 646-1062 
 Trinidad and Tobago, West Indies — 4 Orion Drive, Debe/ Tel. +1 (809) 647-3165/  
 Fax: +1 (868) 647-6809/ E-mail: iskcondebe@yahoo.com 
 Trinidad and Tobago, West Indies — Edinburgh Road, Longdenville, Chaguanas/ 
 Tel. +1 (868) 665-2249/ E-mail: agni.sdg@pamho.net West Coast Demerara, Guyana — Sri 
Gaura Nitai Ashirvad Mandir, Lot “B,” Nauville Flanders  
 (Crane Old Road), West Coast Demerara/ Tel. +592 254 0494/  
 E-mail: iskcon.guyana@yahoo.com 
 West Coast Demerara, Guyana — New Godruma, 24 Uitvlugt Front, West Coast Demerara 
 Williamsburg, Guyana — New Kulinagram, Block 6, Williamsburg, Corentyne, Berbice/  
 Tel. +592 333-3563/ E-mail: prabhoh@yahoo.com 
 RURAL COMMUNITIES 

